Introduction 


Kahlil Gibran is one of the most popular poets of all time. His words have the 
power to move emotions, inspire creativity, and transform lives. He produced 
some of the world’s most remarkable poems and philosophical essays throughout 
his almost thirty-year career. This enriching collection of his works includes 
more than 150 of his stories, prose poems, verse, parables, and autobiographical 
essays. It also contains over thirty original photographic reproductions of 
drawings by Gibran. 

Gibran’s best-known work, “The Prophet’ is composed of twenty-six poetic 
essays. Its popularity grew markedly during the 1960s with the American 
counterculture and then with the flowering of the New Age movements. It has 
remained popular with these and with the wider population to this day. Since it 
was first published in 1923, it has never been out of print, and has been 
translated into more than forty languages. 

General Press is proud to bring together, for the first time in ebook form, all of 
Gibran’s works into a single collection. 


About the Author 


Kahlil Gibran was a Lebanese-American artist, poet, and writer, born in 1883 in 
Lebanon and died in New York in 1931. As a young man he emigrated with his 
family to the United States where he studied art and began his literary career. In 
the Arab world, Gibran is regarded as a literary and political rebel. His romantic 
style was at the heart of a renaissance in modern Arabic literature, especially 
prose poetry, breaking away from the classical school. In Lebanon, he is still 
celebrated as a literary hero. 

In his early teens, the artistry of Gibran’s drawings caught the eye of his 
teachers and he was introduced to the avant-garde Boston artist, photographer, 
and publisher Fred Holland Day, who encouraged and supported Gibran in his 
creative endeavors. A publisher used some of Gibran’s drawings for book covers 
in 1898, and Gibran held his first art exhibition in 1904 in Boston. In 1908, 
Gibran went to study art with Auguste Rodin in Paris for two years. He later 
studied art in Boston. While most of Gibran’s early writing was in Arabic, most 
of his work published after 1918 was in English. 

He is chiefly known in the English-speaking world for his 1923 book ‘The 
Prophet’, an early example of inspirational fiction including a series of 
philosophical essays written in poetic English prose. The book sold well despite 
a cool critical reception, gaining popularity in the 1930s and again especially in 
the 1960s counterculture. Gibran is the third best-selling poet of all time, behind 
Shakespeare and Lao-Tzu. 


A TEAR AND A SMILE 


The Creation 
( = = C) 


The God separated a spirit from Himself and fashioned it into Beauty. He 
showered upon her all the blessings of gracefulness and kindness. He gave her 
the cup of happiness and said, “Drink not from this cup unless you forget the 
past and the future, for happiness is naught but the moment.” And He also gave 
her a cup of sorrow and said, “Drink from this cup and you will understand the 
meaning of the fleeting instants of the joy of life, for sorrow ever abounds.” 

And the God bestowed upon her a love that would desert he forever upon her 
first sigh of earthly satisfaction, and a sweetness that would vanish with her first 
awareness of flattery. 

And He gave her wisdom from heaven to lead to the all-righteous path, and 
placed in the depth of her heart and eye that sees the unseen, and created in he an 
affection and goodness toward all things. He dressed her with raiment of hopes 
spun by the angels of heaven from the sinews of the rainbow. And He cloaked 
her in the shadow of confusion, which is the dawn of life and light. 

Then the God took consuming fire from the furnace of anger, and searing wind 
from the desert of ignorance, and sharp- cutting sands from the shore of 
selfishness, and coarse earth from under the feet of ages, and combined them all 
and fashioned Man. He gave to Man a blind power that rages and drives him into 
a madness which extinguishes only before gratification of desire, and placed life 
in him which is the spectre of death. 

And the god laughed and cried. He felt an overwhelming love and pity for 
Man, and sheltered him beneath His guidance. 


Two Infants 
O = = C) 


A prince stood on the balcony of his palace addressing a great multitude 
summoned for the occasion and said, “Let me offer you and this whole fortunate 
country my congratulations upon the birth of a new prince who will carry the 
name of my noble family, and of whom you will be justly proud. He is the new 
bearer of a great and illustrious ancestry, and upon him depends the brilliant 
future of this realm. Sing and be merry!” The voices of the throngs, full of joy 
and thankfulness, flooded the sky with exhilarating song, welcoming the new 
tyrant who would affix the yoke of oppression to their necks by ruling the weak 
with bitter authority, and exploiting their bodies and killing their souls. For that 
destiny, the people were singing and drinking ecstatically to the heady of the 
new Emir. 

Another child entered life and that kingdom at the same time. While the 
crowds were glorifying the strong and belittling themselves by singing praise to 
a potential despot, and while the angels of heaven were weeping over the 
people’s weakness and servitude, a sick woman was thinking. She lived in an 
old, deserted hovel and, lying in her hard bed beside her newly born infant 
wrapped with ragged swaddles, was starving to death. She was a penurious and 
miserable young wife neglected by humanity; her husband had fallen into the 
trap of death set by the prince’s oppression, leaving a solitary woman to whom 
God had sent, that night, a tiny companion to prevent her from working and 
sustaining life. 

As the mass dispersed and silence was restored to the vicinity, the wretched 
woman placed the infant on her lap and looked into his face and wept as if she 
were to baptize him with tears. And with a hunger weakened voice she spoke to 
the child saying, “Why have you left the spiritual world and come to share with 
me the bitterness of earthly life? Why have you deserted the angels and the 
spacious firmament and come to this miserable land of humans, filled with 
agony, oppression, and heartlessness? I have nothing to give you except tears; 


will you be nourished on tears instead of milk? I have no silk clothes to put on 
you; will my naked, shivering arms give you warmth? The little animals graze in 
the pasture and return safely to their shed; and the small birds pick the seeds and 
sleep placidly between the branches. But you, my beloved, have naught save a 
loving but destitute mother.” 

Then she took the infant to her withered breast and clasped her arms around 
him as if wanting to join the two bodies in one, as before. She lifted her burning 
eyes slowly toward heaven and cried, “God! Have mercy on my unfortunate 
countrymen!” 

At that moment the clouds floated from the face of the moon, whose beams 
penetrated the transom of that poor home and fell upon two corpses. 


The House of Fortune 
OO = = C) 


My wearied heart bade me farewell and left for the House of Fortune. As he 
reached that holy city which the soul had blessed and worshipped, he 
commenced wondering, for he could not find what he had always imagined 
would be there. The city was empty of power, money, and authority. 

And my heart spoke to the daughter of Love saying, “Oh Love, where can I 
find Contentment? I heard that she had come here to join you.” 

And the daughter of Love responded, “Contentment has already gone to 
preach her gospel in the city, where greed and corruption are paramount; we are 
not in need of her.” 

Fortune craves not Contentment, for it is an earthly hope, and its desires are 
embraced by union with objects, while Contentment is naught but heartfelt. 

The eternal soul is never contented; it ever seeks exaltation. Then my heart 
looked upon Life of Beauty and said: “Thou art all knowledge; enlighten me as 
to the mystery of Woman.” And he answered, “Oh human heart, woman is your 
own reflection, and whatever you are, she is; wherever you live, she lives; she is 
like religion if not interpreted by the ignorant, and like a moon, if not veiled with 
clouds, and like a breeze, if not poisoned with impurities.” 

And my heart walked toward Knowledge, the daughter of Love and Beauty, 
and said, “Bestow upon me wisdom, that I might share it with the people.” And 
she responded, “Say not wisdom, but rather fortune, for real fortune comes not 
from outside, but begins in the Holy of Holies of life. Share of thyself with the 
people.” 


A Poet’s Death is His Life 
OO <= a C) 


The dark wings of night enfolded the city upon which Nature had spread a pure 
white garment of snow; and men deserted the streets for their houses in search of 
warmth, while the north wind probed in contemplation of laying waste the 
gardens. There in the suburb stood an old hut heavily laden with snow and on the 
verge of falling. In a dark recess of that hovel was a poor bed in which a dying 
youth was lying, staring at the dim light of his oil lamp, made to flicker by the 
entering winds. He a man in the spring of life who foresaw fully that the 
peaceful hour of freeing himself from the clutches of life was fast nearing. He 
was awaiting Death’s visit gratefully, and upon his pale face appeared the dawn 
of hope; and on his lips a sorrowful smile; and in his eyes forgiveness. 

He was poet perishing from hunger in the city of living rich. He was placed in 
the earthly world to enliven the heart of man with his beautiful and profound 
sayings. He as noble soul, sent by the Goddess of Understanding to soothe and 
make gentle the human spirit. But alas! He gladly bade the cold earth farewell 
without receiving a smile from its strange occupants. 

He was breathing his last and had no one at his bedside save the oil lamp, his 
only companion, and some parchments upon which he had inscribed his heart’s 
feeling. As he salvaged the remnants of his withering strength he lifted his hands 
heavenward; he moved his eyes hopelessly, as if wanting to penetrate the ceiling 
in order to see the stars from behind the veil clouds. 

And he said, “Come, oh beautiful Death; my soul is longing for you. Come 
close to me and unfasten the irons life, for 1 am weary of dragging them. Come, 
oh sweet Death, and deliver me from my neighbours who looked upon me as a 
stranger because I interpret to them the language of the angels. Hurry, oh 
peaceful Death, and carry me from these multitudes who left me in the dark 
comer of oblivion because I do not bleed the weak as they do. Come, oh gentle 
Death, and enfold me under your white wings, for my fellowmen are not in want 
of me. Embrace me, oh Death, full of love and mercy; let your lips touch my lips 


which never tasted a mother’s kiss, not touched a sister’s cheeks, not caresses a 
sweetheart’s fingertips. Come and take me, by beloved Death.” 

Then, at the bedside of the dying poet appeared an angel who possessed a 
supernatural and divine beauty, holding in her hand a wreath of lilies. She 
embraced him and closed his eyes so he could see no more, except with the eye 
of his spirit. She impressed a deep and long and gently withdrawn kiss that left 
and eternal smile of fulfilment upon his lips. Then the hovel became empty and 
nothing was lest save parchments and papers which the poet had strewn with 
bitter futility. 

Hundreds of years later, when the people of the city arose from the diseases 
slumber of ignorance and saw the dawn of knowledge, they erected a monument 
in the most beautiful garden of the city and celebrated a feast every year in 
honour of that poet, whose writings had freed them. Oh, how cruel is man’s 
ignorance! 


The Criminal 
2. ss = C) 


A young man of strong body, weakened by hunger, sat on the walker’s portion of 
the street stretching his hand toward all who passed, begging and repeating his 
hand toward all who passed, begging and repeating the sad song of his defeat in 
life, while suffering from hunger and from humiliation. 

When night came, his lips and tongue were parched, while his hand was still as 
empty as his stomach. 

He gathered himself and went out from the city, where he sat under a tree and 
wept bitterly. Then he lifted his puzzled eyes to heaven while hunger was eating 
his inside, and he said, “Oh Lord, I went to the rich man and asked for 
employment, but he turned me away because of my shabbiness; I knocked at the 
school door, but was forbidden solace because I was empty- handed; I sought 
any occupation that would give me bread, but all to no avail. In desperation I 
asked alms, but they worshippers saw me and said “He is strong and lazy, and he 
should not beg.” 

“Oh Lord, it is Thy will that my mother gave birth unto me, and now the earth 
offers me back to You before the Ending.” 

His expression then changed. He arose and his eyes now glittered in 
determination. He fashioned a thick and heavy stick from the branch of the tree, 
and pointed it toward the city, shouting, “I asked for bread with all the strength 
of my voice, and was refused. Not I shall obtain it by the strength of my 
muscles! I asked for bread in the name of mercy and love, but humanity did not 
heed. I shall take it now in the name of evil!” 

The passing years rendered the youth a robber, killer and destroyer of souls; he 
crushed all who opposed him; he amassed fabulous wealth with which he won 
himself over to those in power. He was admired by colleagues, envied by other 
thieves, and feared by the multitudes. 

His riches and false position prevailed upon the Emir to appoint him deputy in 


that city—the sad process pursued by unwise governors. Thefts were then 
legalized; oppression was supported by authority; crushing of the weak became 
commonplace; the throngs curried and praised. 

Thus does the first touch of humanity’s selfishness make criminals of the 
humble, and make killers of the sons of peace; thus does the early greed of 
humanity grow and strike back at humanity a thousand fold! 


Song of Fortune 


Man and I are sweethearts 

He craves me and I long for him, 

But alas! 

Between us has appeared a rival who brings us misery. 
She is cruel and demanding, 

Possessing empty lure. 

Her name is Substance. 

She follows wherever we go 

And watches like a sentinel, 

Bringing restlessness to my lover. 


I ask for my beloved in the forest, 

Under the trees, by the lakes. 

I cannot find him, 

For Substance has spirited him to the clamorous city 
And placed him on the throne 

Of quaking, metal riches. 


I call for him with the voice of knowledge 

And the song of Wisdom. 

He does not hearken, 

For Substance has enticed him into the dungeon 
Of selfishness, where avarice dwells. 


I seek him in the field of Contentment, 


But I am alone, 

For my rival has imprisoned him, 
I the cave of gluttony and greed, 
And locked him there 

With painful chains of gold. 


I call to him at dawn, when Nature smiles, 
But he does not hear, 
For excess has laden his drugged eyes with sick slumber. 


I beguile him at eventide, when Silence rules 

And the flowers sleep. 

But he responds not, 

For his fear over what the morrow will bring shadows his thoughts. 


He yearns to love me; 

He asks for me in this own acts. 

But he will find me not except in God’s acts. 

He seeks me in the edifices of his glory 

Which he has built upon the bones of others; 

He whispers to me from among his heaps of gold and silver; 
But he will find me only by coming to the house of Simplicity 
Which God has built at the brink of the stream of affection. 


He desires to kiss me before his coffers, 
But his lips will never touch mine, 
Except in the richness of the pure breeze. 


He asks me to share with him his fabulous wealth, 
But I will not forsake God’s fortune; 


I will not cast off my cloak of beauty. 


He seeks deceit for medium; 


I seek only the medium of his heart. 
He bruises his heart in his narrow cell; 
I would enrich his heart with all my love. 


My beloved has learned how to shriek and cry for my enemy, Substance; 
I would teach him how to shed tears of affection 

And mercy from the eyes of his soul 

For all things, 

And utter sighs of contentment through those tears. 


Man is my sweetheart; 
I want to belong to him. 


Song of the Rain 


I am dotted silver threads dropped from heaven by the gods. 
Nature then takes me, to adorn her fields and valleys. 


Tam beautiful pearls, 
Plucked from the crown of Ishtar by the daughter of Dawn to embellish the 
gardens. 


When I cry the hills laugh; 
When I humble myself the flowers rejoice; 
When I bow, all things are elated. 


The field and the cloud are lovers 

And between them I am a messenger of mercy. 
I quench the thirst of one; 

I cure the ailment of the other. 


The voice of thunder declares my arrival; 
The rainbow announces my departure. 

IT am like earthly life, 

Which begins at the feet of the mad elements 
And ends under the upraised wings of death. 


I emerge from the heard of the sea 
Soar with the breeze. 
When I see a field in need, 


I descend and embrace the flowers and the trees in a million little ways. 


I touch gently at the windows with my soft fingers, 
And my announcement is a welcome song all can hear 
But only the sensitive can understand. 


The heat in the air gives birth to me, 
But in turn I kill it, 
As woman overcomes man with the strength she takes from him. 


Tam the sigh of the sea; 
The laughter of the field; 
The tears of heaven. 


So with love— 

Sighs from the deep sea of affection; 
Laughter from the colourful field of the spirit; 
Tears from the endless heaven of memories. 


The Poet 


2 


He is a link between this and the coming world. 
He is a pure spring from which all thirsty souls may drink. 


He is a tree watered by the River of Beauty, 
Bearing fruit which the hungry heart craves; 


He is a nightingale, 

Soothing the depressed spirit with his beautiful melodies; 
He is a white cloud appearing over the horizon, 
Ascending and growing until it fills the face of the sky. 
Then it falls on the flows in the field of Life, 

Opening their petals to admit the light. 


He is an angel, 

Sent by the goddess to preach the Deity’s gospel; 
He is a brilliant lamp, 

Unconquered by darkness 

And inextinguishable by the wind. 

It is filled with oil by Istar of Love, 

And lighted by Apollon of Music. 


He is a solitary figure, 

Robed in simplicity and kindness; 

He sits upon the lap of Nature to draw his inspiration, 
And stays up in the silence of the night, 


Awaiting the descending of the spirit. 


He is a sower 
Who sows the seeds of his heart in the prairies of affection, 
And humanity reaps the harvest for her nourishment. 


This is the poet—whom the people ignore in this life, 
And who is recognized only when he bids the earthly world farewell 
And returns to his arbour in heaven. 


This is the poet—who asks naught of humanity but a smile. 

This is the poet—whose spirit ascends and fills the firmament with beautiful 
sayings; 

Yet the people deny themselves his radiance. 


Until when shall the people remain asleep? 

Until when shall they continue to glorify those who attain greatness by 
moments of advantage? 

How long shall they ignore those who enable them to see the beauty of their 
spirit, 

Symbol of peace and love? 


Until when shall human beings honour the dead and forget the living, 
Who spend their lives encircled in misery, 

And who consume themselves, 

Like burning candles to illuminate the way 

For the ignorant and lead them into the path of light? 


Poet, you are the life of this life, 
And you have triumphed over the ages of despite their severity. 


Poet, you will one day rule the hearts, 
And therefore, your kingdom has no ending. 


Poet, examine your crown of thorns; 
You will find concealed in it a budding wreath of laurel. 


Laughter and Tears 
(2 ~ = C) 


As the Sun withdrew his rays from the garden, and the moon threw cushioned 
beams upon the flowers, I sat under the trees pondering upon the phenomena of 
the atmosphere, looking through the branches at the strewn stars which glittered 
like chips of silver upon a blue carpet; and I could hear from a distance the 
agitated murmur of the rivulet singing its way briskly into the valley. 

When the birds took shelter among the boughs, and the flowers folded their 
petals, and tremendous silence descended, I heard a rustle of feet though the 
grass. I took heed and saw a young couple approaching my arbour. The say 
under a tree where I could see them without being seen. 

After he looked about in every direction, I heard the young man saying, “Sit 
by me, my beloved, and listen to my heart; smile, for your happiness is a symbol 
of our future; be merry, for the sparkling days rejoice with us. 

“My soul is warning me of the doubt in your heart, for doubt in love is a sin. 
“Soon you will be the owner of this vast land, lighted by this beautiful moon; 
soon you will be the mistress of my palace, and all the servants and maids will 
obey your commands. 

“Smile, my beloved, like the gold smiles from my father’s coffers. 

“My heart refuses to deny you its secret. Twelve months of comfort and travel 
await us; for a year we will spend my father’s gold at the blue lakes of 
Switzerland, and viewing the edifices of Italy and Egypt, and resting under the 
Holy Cedars of Lebanon; you will meet the princesses who will envy you for 
your jewels and clothes. 

“All these things I will do for you; will you be satisfied?” 

In a little while I saw them walking and stepping on flowers as the rich step 
upon the hearts of the poor. As they disappeared from my sight, I commenced to 
make comparison between love and money, and to analyze their position in the 
heart. 


Money! The source of insincere love; the spring of false light and fortune; the 
well of poisoned water; the desperation of old age! 

I was still wandering in the vast desert of contemplation when a forlorn and 
spectre-like couple passed by me and sat on the grass; a young man and a young 
woman who had left their farming shacks in the nearby fields for this cool and 
solitary place. 

After a few moments of complete silence, I heard the following words uttered 
with sighs from weather-bitten lips, “Shed not tears, my beloved; love that opens 
our eyes and enslaves our hearts can give us the blessing of patience. Be 
consoled in our delay, for we have taken an oath and entered Love’s shrine; for 
our love will ever grow in adversity; for it is in Love’s name that we are 
suffering the obstacles of poverty and the sharpness of misery and the emptiness 
of separation. I shall attack these hardships until I triumph and place in your 
hands a strength that will help over all things to complete the journey of life. 

“Love—which is God—will consider our sighs and tears as incense burned at 
His altar and He will reward us with fortitude. Good-bye, my beloved; I must 
leave before the heartening moon vanishes.” 

A pure voice, combined of the consuming flame of love, and the hopeless 
bitterness of longing and the resolved sweetness of patience, said, “Good-bye, 
my beloved.” 

They separated, and the elegy to their union was smothered by the wails of my 
crying heart. 

I looked upon slumbering Nature, and with deep reflection discovered the 
reality of a vast and infinite thing—something no power could demand, 
influence acquire, nor riches purchase. Nor could it be effaced by the tears of 
time or deadened by sorrow; a thing which cannot be discovered by the blue 
lakes of Switzerland or the beautiful edifices of Italy. 

It is something that gathers strength with patience, grows despite obstacles, 
warms in winter, flourishes in spring, casts a breeze in summer, and bears fruit in 
autumn—I found Love. 


Vision 
O os = C) 


There in the middle of the field, by the side of a crystalline stream, I saw a bird- 
cage whose rods and hinges were fashioned by an expert’s hands. In one corner 
lay a dead bird, and in another were two basins—one empty of water and the 
other of seeds. I stood there reverently, as if the lifeless bird and the murmur of 
the water were worthy of deep silence and respect—something worth of 
examination and meditation by the heard and conscience. 

As I engrossed myself in view and thought, I found that the poor creature had 
died of thirst beside a stream of water, and of hunger in the midst of a rich field, 
cradle of life; like a rich man locked inside his iron safe, perishing from hunger 
amid heaps of gold. 

Before my eyes I saw the cage turned suddenly into a human skeleton, and the 
dead bird into a man’s heart which was bleeding from a deep wound that looked 
like the lips of a sorrowing woman. A voice came from that wound saying, “I am 
the human heart, prisoner of substance and victim of earthly laws. 

“In God’s field of Beauty, at the edge of the stream of life, I was imprisoned in 
the cage of laws made by man. 

“In the centre of beautiful Creation I died neglected because I was kept from 
enjoying the freedom of God’s bounty. 

“Everything of beauty that awakens my love and desire is a disgrace, 
according to man’s conceptions; everything of goodness that I crave is but 
naught, according to his judgment. 

“T am the lost human heart, imprisoned in the foul dungeon of man’s dictates, 
tied with chains of earthly authority, dead and forgotten by laughing humanity 
whose tongue is tied and whose eyes are empty of visible tears.” 

All these words I heard, and I saw them emerging with a stream of ever 
thinning blood from that wounded heart. 

More was said, but my misted eyes and crying should prevented further sight 


or hearing. 


Two Wishes 
OO os = C) 


In the silence of the night Death descended from God toward the earth. He 
hovered above a city and pierced the dwellings with his eyes. He say the spirits 
floating on wings of dreams, and the people who were surrendered to the 
Slumber. 

When the moon fell below the horizon and the city became black, Death 
walked silently among the houses—careful to touch nothing—until he reached a 
palace. He entered through the bolted gates undisturbed, and stood by the rich 
man’s bed; and as Death touched his forehead, the sleeper’s eyes opened, 
showing great fright. 

When he saw the spectre, he summoned a voice mingled with fear and anger, 
and said, “God away, oh horrible dream; leave me, you dreadful ghost. Who are 
you? How did you enter this place? What do you want? Leave this place at once, 
for I am the lord of the house and will call my slaves and guards, and order them 
to kill you!” 

Then Death spoke, softly but with smouldering thunder, “I am Death. Stand 
and bow!” 

The man responded, “What do you want? What have you come here when I 
have not yet finished my affairs? What see you from strength such as mine? Go 
to the weak man, and take him away! 

“T loathe the sight of your bloody paws and hollow face, and my eyes take sick 
at your horrible ribbed winds and cadaverous body.” 

After a moment of fearful realization he added, “No, No, oh merciful Death! 
Mind not talk, for even fear reveals what the heart forbids. 

“Take a bushelful of my gold, or a handful of my slave’s souls, but leave me. I 
have accounts with Life requiring settling; I have due from people much gold; 
my ships have not reached the harbour; my demand, but spare my life. Death, I 
own harems of supernatural beauty; your choice is my gift to you. Give heed, 


Death—I have but one child, and I love him dearly for he is my only joy in this 
life. I offer supreme sacrifice—take him, but spare me!” 

Death murmured, “You are not rich, but pitifully poor.” Then Death took the 
hand of that earthly slave, removed his reality, and gave to the angels the heavy 
task of correction. 

And Death walked slowly amidst the dwellings of the poor until he reached 
the most miserable he could find. He entered and approached a bed upon which 
a youth slept fitfully. Death touched his eyes; the lad sprang up as he saw Death 
standing by, and, with a voice full of love and hope he said, “Here I am, my 
beautiful Death. Accept my soul, for you are the hope of my dreams. Be their 
accomplishment! Embrace me, oh beloved Death! You are merciful; do not leave 
me. You are God’s messenger; deliver me to Him. You are the right hand of 
Truth and the heart of Kindness; do not neglect me. 

“T have begged for you many times, but you did not come; I have sought you, 
but you avoided me; I called out to you, but you listened not. You hear me now 
—embrace my soul, beloved Death!” 

Death placed his softened hand upon the trembling lips, removed all reality, 
and enfolded it beneath his wings for secure conduct. And returning to the sky, 
Death looked back and whispered his warning: 

“Only those return to Eternity. Who on earth seek out Eternity.” 


Yesterday and Today 
QO — a C) 


The gold-hoarder walked in his palace park and with him walked his troubles. 
And over his head hovered worries as a vulture hovers over a carcass, until he 
reached a beautiful lake surrounded by magnificent marble statuary. 

He sat there pondering the water which poured from the mouths of the statues 
like thoughts flowing freely from a lover’s imagination, and contemplating 
heavily his palace which stood upon a knoll like a birth-mark upon the cheek of 
a maiden. His fancy revealed to him the pages of his life’s drama which he read 
with falling tears that veiled his eyes and prevented him from viewing man’s 
feeble additions to Nature. 

He looked back with piercing regret to the images of his early life, woven into 
pattern by the gods, until he could no longer control his anguish. He said aloud, 
“Yesterday I was grazing my sheep in the green valley, enjoying my existence, 
sounding my flute, and holding my head high. Today I am a prisoner of greed. 
Gold leads into gold, then into restlessness and finally into crushing misery. 

“Yesterday I was like a singing bird, soaring freely here and there in the fields. 
Today I am a slave to fickle wealth, society’s rules, and city’s customs, and 
purchased friends, pleasing the people by conforming to the strange and narrow 
laws of man. I was born to be free and enjoy the bounty of life, but I find myself 
like a beast of burden so heavily laden with gold that his back is breaking. 

“Where are the spacious plains, the singing brooks, the pure breeze, the 
closeness of Nature? Where is my deity? I have lost all! Naught remains save 
loneliness that saddens me, gold that ridicules me, slaves who curse to my back, 
and a palace that I have erected as a tomb for my happiness, and in whose 
greatness I have lost my heart. 

“Yesterday I roamed the prairies and the hills together with the Bedouin’s 
daughter; Virtue was our companion, Love our delight, and the moon our 
guardian. Today I am among women with shallow beauty who sell themselves 


for gold and diamonds. 

“Yesterday I was carefree, sharing with the shepherds all the joy of life; eating, 
playing, working, singing, and dancing together to the music of the heart’s truth. 
Today I find myself among the people like a frightened lamb among the wolves. 
As I walk in the roads, they gaze at me with hateful eyes and point at me with 
scorn and jealousy, and as I steal through the park I see frowning faces all about 
me. 

“Yesterday I was rich in happiness and today I am poor in gold. 

“Yesterday I was a happy shepherd looking upon his head as a merciful king 
looks with pleasure upon his contented subjects. Today I am a slave standing 
before my wealth, my wealth which robbed me of the beauty of life I once 
knew. 

“Forgive me, my Judge! I did not know that riches would put my life in 
fragments and lead me into the dungeons of harshness and stupidity. What I 
thought was glory is naught but an eternal inferno.” 

He gathered himself wearily and walked slowly toward the palace, sighing and 
repeating, “Is this what people call wealth? Is this the god I am serving and 
worshipping? Is this what I seek of the earth? Why can I not trade it for one 
particle of contentment? Who would sell me one beautiful thought for a ton of 
gold? Who would give me one moment of love for a handful of gems? Who 
would grant me an eye that can see others’ hearts, and take all my coffers in 
barter?” 

As he reached the palace gates he turned and looked toward the city as 
Jeremiah gazed toward Jerusalem. He raised his arms in woeful lament and 
shouted, “Oh people of the noisome city, who are living in darkness, hastening 
toward misery, preaching falsehood, and speaking with stupidity...until when 
shall you remain ignorant? Unit when shall you abide in the filth of life and 
continue to desert its gardens? Why wear you tattered robes of narrowness while 
the silk raiment of Nature’s beauty is fashioned for you? The lamp of wisdom is 
dimming; it is time to furnish it with oil. The house of true fortune is being 
destroyed; it is time to rebuild it and guard it. The thieves of ignorance have 
stolen the treasure of your peace; it is time to retake it!” 

At that moment a poor man stood before him and stretched forth his hand for 
alms. As he looked at the beggar, his lips parted, his eyes brightened with a 
softness, and his face radiated kindness. It was as if the yesterday he had 
lamented by the lake had come to greet him. He embraced the pauper with 


affection and filled his hands with gold, and with a voice sincere with the 
sweetness of love he said, “Come back tomorrow and bring with you your fellow 
sufferers. All your possessions will be restored.” 

He entered his palace saying, “Everything in life is good; even gold, for it 
teaches a lesson. Money is like a stringed instrument; he who does not know 
how to use it properly will hear only discordant music. Money is like love; it 
kills slowly and painfully the one who withholds it, and it enlivens the other who 
turns it upon his fellow man.” 


Leave Me, My Blamer 


Leave me, my blamer, 

For the sake of the love which unites your soul with that of your beloved one; 
For the sake of that which joins spirit with mothers affection, 

And ties your heart with filial love. 

Go, and leave me to my own weeping heart. 


Let me sail in the ocean of my dreams; 

Wait until Tomorrow comes, 

For tomorrow is free to do with me as he wishes. 
Your laying is naught but shadow 

That walks with the spirit to the tomb of abashment, 
And shows heard the cold, solid earth. 


T have a little heart within me 

And I like to bring him out of his prison and carry him on the palm of my 
hand 

To examine him in depth and extract his secret. 

Aim not your arrows at him, 

Lest he takes fright and vanish ‘ere he pours the secret blood 

As a sacrifice at the altar of his own faith, 

Given him by Deity 

When he fashioned him of love and beauty. 


The sun is rising and the nightingale is singing, 
And the myrtle is breathing its fragrance into space. 


I want to free myself from the quilted slumber of wrong. 
Do not detain me, my blamer! 


Cavil me not by mention of the lions of the forest 
Or the snakes of the valley, 

For me soul knows no fear of earth 

And accepts no warning of evil before evil comes. 


Advise me not, my blamer, 

For calamities have opened my heart 

And tears have cleansed my eyes, 

And errors have taught me the language of the hearts. 


Talk not of banishment, for conscience is my judge 
And he will justify me and protect me if I am innocent, 
And will deny me of life if Iam a criminal. 


Love’s procession is moving; 

Beauty is waving her banner; 

Youth is sounding the trumpet of joy; 

Disturb not my contrition, my blamer. 

Let me walk, for the path is rich with roses and mint, 
And the air is scented with cleanliness. 


Relate not the tales of wealth and greatness, 
For my soul is rich with bounty and great with God’s glory. 


Speak not of peoples and laws and kingdoms, 
For the whole earth is my birthplace 
And all humans are my brothers. 


Go from me, for you are taking away life— 
Giving repentance and bringing needless words. 


The Beauty of Death 


Part One—the Calling 


Let me sleep, for my soul is intoxicated with love and 

Let me rest, for my spirit has had its bounty of days and nights; 

Light the candles and burn the incense around my bed, and 

Scatter leaves of jasmine and roses over my body; 

Embalm my hair with frankincense and sprinkle my feet with perfume, 
And read what the hand of Death has written on my forehead. 


Let me rest in the arms of Slumber, for my open eyes are tired; 
Let the silver-stringed lyre quiver and soothe my spirit; 
Weave from the harp and lute a veil around my withering heart. 


Sing of the past as you behold the dawn of hope in my eyes, for 
It’s magic meaning is a soft bed upon which my heart rests. 


Dry your tears, my friends, and raise your heads as the flowers 
Raise their crowns to greet the dawn. 

Look at the bride of Death standing like a column of light 
Between my bed and the infinite; 


Hold your breath and listen with me to the beckoning rustle of her white 
wings. 


Come close and bid me farewell; 
Touch my eyes with smiling lips. 


Let the children grasp my hands with soft and rosy fingers; 

Let the ages place their veined hands upon my head and bless me; 
Let the virgins come close and see the shadow of God in my eyes, 
And hear the echo of His will racing with my breath. 


Part Two—the Ascending 


I have passed a mountain peak 

And my soul is soaring in the firmament of complete and unbound freedom; 
I am far, far away, my companions, 

And the clouds are hiding the hills from my eyes. 

The valleys are becoming flooded with an ocean of silence, 

And the hands of oblivion are engulfing the roads and the houses; 

The prairies and fields are disappearing behind a white spectre 

That looks like the spring cloud, yellow as the candlelight 

And red as the twilight. 


The songs of the waves and the hymns of the streams are scattered, 
And the voices of the throngs reduced to silence; 

And I can hear naught but the music of Eternity 

In exact harmony with the spirit’s desires. 

Tam cloaked in full whiteness; 

Iam in comfort; I am in peace. 


Part Three—the Remains 


Unwrap me from this white linen shroud 

And clothe me with leaves of jasmine and lilies; 
Take my body from the ivory casket and let it rest 
Upon pillows of orange blossoms. 


Lament me not, but sing songs of youth and joy; 

Shed not tears upon me, but sing of harvest and the winepress; 
Utter no sigh of agony, 

But draw upon my face with your finger the symbol of Love and Joy. 
Disturb not the air’s tranquillity with chanting and requiems, 

But let your hearts sing with me the song of Eternal Life; 

Mourn me not with apparel of black, 

But dress in colour and rejoice with me; 

Talk not of my departure with sighs in your hearts; 

Close your eyes and you will see me with you forevermore. 


Place me upon clusters of leaves 

And carry my upon your friendly shoulders 

And walk slowly to the deserted forest. 

Take me not to the crowded burying ground 

Lest my slumber be disrupted by the rattling of bones and skulls. 
Carry me to the cypress woods 

And dig my grave where violets and poppies grow not in the other’s shadow; 
Let my grave be deep 

So that the flood will not carry my bones to the open valley; 

Let my grace be wide, 

So that the twilight shadows will come and sit by me. 


Take from me all earthly raiment 

And place me deep in my Mother Earth; 

And place me with care upon my mother’s breast. 

Cover me with soft earth, 

And let each handful be mixed with seeds of jasmine, lilies and myrtle; 

And when they grow above me, 

And thrive on my body’s element they will breathe the fragrance of my heart 
into space; 

And reveal even to the sun the secret of my peace; 

And sail with the breeze and comfort the wayfarer. 


Leave me then, friends—leave me and depart on mute feet, 

As the silence walks in the deserted valley; 

Leave me to God and disperse yourselves slowly, 

As the almond and apple blossoms disperse under the vibration of 
Nisan’s breeze. 

Go back to the joy of your dwellings 

And you will find there that which Death cannot remove from you and me. 
Leave with place, for what you see here is far away in meaning 

From the earthly world. Leave me. 


A Poet’s Voice 
'e, — = C) 


Part One 


The power of charity sows deep in my heart, and I reap and gather the wheat in 
bundles and give them to the hungry. 

My soul gives life to the grapevine and I press its bunches and give the juice to 
the thirsty. 

Heaven fills my lamp with oil and I place it at my window to direct the 
stranger through the dark. 

I do all these things because I live in them; and if destiny should tie my hands 
and prevent me from so doing, then death would be my only desire. For Iam a 
poet, and if I cannot give, I shall refuse to receive. 

Humanity rages like a tempest, but I sigh in silence for I know the storm must 
pass away while a sigh goes to God. 

Human kinds cling to earthly things, but I seek ever to embrace the torch of 
love so it will purify me by its fire and sear inhumanity from my heart. 

Substantial things deaden a man without suffering; love awakens him with 
enlivening pains. 

Humans are divided into different clans and tribes, and belong to countries and 
towns. But I find myself a stranger to all communities and belong to no 
settlement. The universe is my country and the human family is my tribe. 

Men are weak, and it is sad that they divide amongst themselves. The world is 
narrow and it is unwise to cleave it into kingdoms, empires, and provinces. 

Human kinds unite themselves one to destroy the temples of the soul, and they 
join hands to build edifices for earthly bodies. I stand alone listening to the voice 
of hope in my deep self saying, “As love enlivens a man’s heart with pain, so 
ignorance teaches him the way of knowledge.” Pain and ignorance lead to great 


joy and knowledge because the Supreme Being has created nothing vain under 
the sun. 


Part Two 


I have a yearning for my beautiful country, and I love its people because of their 
misery. But if my people rose, stimulated by plunder and motivated by what they 
call “patriotic spirit” to murder, and invaded my neighbour’s country, then upon 
the committing of any human atrocity I would hate my people and my country. 

I sing the praise of my birthplace and long to see the home of my children; but 
if the people in that home refused to shelter and feed the needy wayfarer, I would 
convert my praise into anger and my longing to forgetfulness. My inner voice 
would say, “The house that does not comfort the need is worthy of naught by 
destruction.” 

I love my native village with some of my love for my country; and I love my 
country with part of my love for the earth, all of which is my country; and I love 
the earth will all of myself because it is the haven of humanity, the manifest 
spirit of God. 

Humanity is the spirit of the Supreme Being on earth, and that humanity is 
standing amidst ruins, hiding its nakedness behind tattered rags, shedding tears 
upon hollow cheeks, and calling for its children with pitiful voice. But the 
children are busy singing their clan’s anthem; they are busy sharpening the 
swords and cannot hear the cry of their mothers. 

Humanity appeals to its people but they listen not. Were one to listen, and 
console a mother by wiping her tears, other would say, “He is weak, affected by 
sentiment.” 

Humanity is the spirit of the Supreme Being on earth, and that Supreme Being 
preaches love and good-will. But the people ridicule such teachings. The 
Nazarene Jesus listened, and crucifixion was his lot; Socrates heard the voice 
and followed it, and he too fell victim in body. The followers of The Nazarene 
and Socrates are the followers of Deity, and since people will not kill them, they 
deride them, saying, “Ridicule is more bitter than killing.” 

Jerusalem could not kill The Nazarene, nor Athens Socrates; they are living 
yet and shall live eternally. Ridicule cannot triumph over the followers of Deity. 


They live and grow forever. 


Part Three 


Thou art my brother because you are a human, and we both are sons of one Holy 
Spirit; we are equal and made of the same earth. 

You are here as my companion along the path of life, and my aid in 
understanding the meaning of hidden Truth. You are a human, and, that fact 
sufficing, I love you as a brother. You may speak of me as you choose, for 
Tomorrow shall take you away and will use your talk as evidence for his 
judgment, and you shall receive justice. 

You may deprive me of whatever I possess, for my greed instigated the 
amassing of wealth and you are entitled to my lot if it will satisfy you. 

You may do unto me whatever you wish, but you shall not be able to touch my 
Truth. 

You may shed my blood and bum my body, but you cannot kill or hurt my 
spirit. 

You may tie my hands with chains and my feet with shackles, and put me in 
the dark prison, but who shall not enslave my thinking, for it is free, like the 
breeze in the spacious sky. 

You are my brother and I love you. I love you worshipping in your church, 
kneeling in your temple, and praying in your mosque. You and I and all are 
children of one religion, for the varied paths of religion are but the fingers of the 
loving hand of the Supreme Being, extended to all, offering completeness of 
spirit to all, anxious to receive all. 

I love you for your Truth, derived from your knowledge; that Truth which I 
cannot see because of my ignorance. But I respect it as a divine thing, for it is 
the deed of the spirit. Your Truth shall meet my Truth in the coming world and 
blend together like the fragrance of flowers and becoming one whole and eternal 
Truth, perpetuating and living in the eternity of Love and Beauty. 

I love you because you are weak before the strong oppressor, and poor before 
the greedy rich. For these reasons I shed tears and comfort you; and from behind 
my tears I see you embraced in the arms of Justice, smiling and forgiving your 
persecutors. You are my brother and I love you. 


Part Four 


You are my brother, but why are you quarrelling with me? Why do you invade 
my country and try to subjugate me for the sake of pleasing those who are 
seeking glory and authority? 

Why do you leave your wife and children and follow Death to the distant land 
for the sake of those who buy glory with your blood, and high honour with your 
mother’s tears? 

Is it an honour for a man to kill his brother man? If you deem it an honour, let 
it be an act of worship, and erect a temple to Cain who slew his brother Abel. 

Is self-preservation the first law of Nature? Why, then, does Greed urge you to 
self-sacrifice in order only to achieve his aim in hurting your brothers? Beware, 
my brother, of the leader who says, “Love of existence obliges us to deprive the 
people of their rights!” I say unto you but this: protecting others’ rights is the 
noblest and most beautiful human act; if my existence requires that I kill others, 
then death is more honourable to me, and if I cannot find someone to kill me for 
the protection of my honour, I will not hesitate to take my life by my own hands 
for the sake of Eternity before Eternity comes. 

Selfishness, my brother, is the cause of blind superiority, and superiority 
creates clanship, and clanship creates authority which leads to discord and 
subjugation. 

The soul believes in the power of knowledge and justice over dark ignorance; 
it denies the authority that supplies the swords to defend and strengthen 
ignorance and oppression—that authority which destroyed Babylon and shook 
the foundation of Jerusalem and left Rome in ruins. It is that which made people 
call criminals great mean; made writers respect their names; made historians 
relate the stories of their inhumanity in manner of praise. 

The only authority I obey is the knowledge of guarding and acquiescing in the 
Natural Law of Justice. 

What justice does authority display when it kills the killer? When it imprisons 
the robber? When it descends on a neighbourhood country and slays its people? 
What does justice think of the authority under which a killer punishes the one 
who kills, and a thief sentences the one who steals? 


You are my brother, and I love you; and Love is justice with its full intensity 
and dignity. If justice did not support my love for you, regardless of your tribe 
and community, I would be a deceiver concealing the ugliness of selfishness 
behind the outer garment of pure love. 


Conclusion 


My soul is my friend who consoles me in misery and distress of life. He who 
does not befriend his soul is an enemy of humanity, and he who does not find 
human guidance within himself will perish desperately. Life emerges from 
within, and derives not from environs. 

I came to say a word and I shall say it now. But if death prevents its uttering, it 
will be said by Tomorrow, for Tomorrow never leaves a secret in the book of 
Eternity. 

I came to live in the glory of Love and the light of Beauty, which are the 
reflections of God. I am here living, and the people are unable to exile me from 
the domain of life for they know I will live in death. If they pluck my eyes I will 
hearken to the murmurs of Love and the songs of Beauty. 

If they close my ears I will enjoy the touch of the breeze mixed with the 
incense of Love and the fragrance of Beauty. 

If they place me in a vacuum, I will live together with my soul, the child of 
Love and Beauty. 

I came here to be for all and with all, and what I do today in my solitude will 
be echoed by Tomorrow to the people. 

What I say now with one heart will be said tomorrow by many hearts. 


The Life of Love 


Spring 


Come, my beloved; let us walk amidst the knolls, 

For the snow is water, 

And life is alive from its slumber and is roaming the hills and valleys. 

Let us follow the footprints of Spring into the distant fields, 

And mount the hilltops to draw inspiration high above the cool green plains. 


Dawn of Spring has unfolded her winter-kept garment 
And placed it on the peach and citrus trees; 
And they appear as brides in the ceremonial custom of the Night of Kedre. 


The sprigs of grapevine embrace each other like sweethearts, 
And the brooks burst out in dance between the rocks, 
Repeating the song of joy; 

And the flowers bud suddenly from the heart of nature, 

Like foam from the rich heart of the sea. 


Come, my beloved; let us drink the last of Winter’s tears from the cupped 
lilies, 

And soothe our spirits with the shower of notes from the birds, 

And wander in exhilaration through the intoxicating breeze. 


Let us sit by that rock, where violets hide; 
Let us pursue their exchange of the sweetness of kisses. 


Summer 


Let us go into the fields, my beloved, 

For the time of harvest approaches, 

And the sun’s eyes are ripening the grain. 

Let us tend the fruit of the earth, 

As the spirit nourishes the grains of joy from the seeds of Love, sowed deep in 
our hearts. 

Let us fill our bins with the products of nature, 

As life fills so abundantly the domain of our hearts with her endless bounty. 

Let us make the flowers our bed, 

And the sky our blanket, 

And rest our heads together upon pillows of soft hay. 


Let us relax after the day’s toil, and listen to the provoking murmur of the 
brook. 


Autumn 


Let us go and gather grapes in the vineyard for the winepress, 
And keep the wine in old vases, 
As the spirit keeps Knowledge of the ages in eternal vessels. 


Let us return to our dwelling, 

For the wind has caused the yellow leaves to fall 

And shroud the withering flowers that whisper elegy to Summer. 
Come home, my eternal sweetheart, 

For the birds have made pilgrimage to warmth 

And lest the chilled prairies suffering pangs of solitude. 

The jasmine and myrtle have no more tears. 


Let us retreat, for the tired brook has ceased its song; 
And the bubble-some springs are drained of their copious weeping; 
And their cautious old hills have stored away their colourful garments. 


Come, my beloved; Nature is justly weary 
And is bidding her enthusiasm farewell 
With quiet and contented melody. 


Winter 


Come close to me, oh companion of my full life; 

Come close to me and let not Winter ’s touch enter between us. 
Sit by me before the hearth, 

For fire is the only fruit of Winter. 


Speak to me of the glory of your heart, 

For that is greater than the shrieking elements beyond our door. 
Bind the door and seal the transoms, 

For the angry countenance of the heaven depresses my spirit, 
And the face of our snow-laden fields makes my soul cry. 


Feed the lamp with oil and let it not dim, 
And place it by you, 
So I can read with tears what your life with me has written upon your face. 


Bring Autumn’s wine. 

Let us drink and sing the song of remembrance to Spring’s carefree sowing, 
And Summer’s watchful tending, 

And Autumn’s reward in harvest. 


Come close to me, oh beloved of my soul; 
The fire is cooling and fleeing under the ashes. 


Embrace me, for I fear loneliness; 

The lamp is dim, and the wine which we pressed is closing our eyes. 
Let us look upon each other before they are shut. 

Find me with your arms and embrace me; 

Let slumber then embrace our souls as one. 

Kiss me, my beloved, for Winter has stolen all but our moving lips. 


You are close by me, my Forever. 
How deep and wide will be the ocean of Slumber, 
And how recent was the dawn! 


Song of the Wave 


? C 


SesSsr—S2. 


The strong shore is my beloved 

And I am his sweetheart. 

We are at last united by love, 

And then the moon draws me from him. 
I go to him in haste and depart 
Reluctantly, with many little farewells. 


I steal swiftly from behind the blue horizon, 
To cast the silver of my foam upon the gold of his sand, 
And we blend in melted brilliance. 


I quench his thirst and submerge his heart; 

He softens my voice and subdues my temper. 
At dawn I recite the rules of love upon his ears, 
And he embraces me longingly. 


At eventide I sing to him the song of hope, 

And then print smooth kisses upon his face; 

I am swift and fearful, but he is quiet, patient, and thoughtful. 
His broad bosom soothes my restlessness. 


As the tide comes we caress each other, 
When it withdraws, I drop to his feet in prayer. 


Many times have I danced around mermaids 


As they rose from the depths 

And rested upon my crest to watch the stars; 

Many times have I heard lovers complain of their smallness, 
And I helped them to sigh. 


Many times have I teased the great rocks 

And fondled them with a smile, 

But never have I received laughter from them; 
Many times have I lifted drowning souls 

And carried them tenderly to my beloved shore. 
He gives them strength as he takes mine. 


Many times have I stolen gems from the depths 
And presented them to my beloved shore. 

He takes them in silence, 

But still I give for he welcomes me ever. 


In the heaviness of night, 

When all creatures seek the ghost of slumber, 

I sit up, singing at one time and sighing at another. 
Tam awake always. 


Alas! Sleeplessness has weakened me! 
But Iam a lover, and the truth of love is strong. 
I may be weary, but I shall never die. 


Peace 


The tempest calmed after bending the branches of the trees and leaning heavily 
upon the grain in the field. The stars appeared as broken remnants of lightning, 
but now silence prevailed over all, as if Nature’s war had never been fought. 

At that hour a young woman entered her chamber and knelt by her bed 
sobbing bitterly. Her heart flamed with agony but she could finally open her lips 
and say, “Oh Lord, bring him home safely to me. I have exhausted my tears and 
can offer no more, oh Lord, full of love and mercy. My patience is drained and 
calamity is seeking possession of my heart. Save him, oh Lord, from the iron 
paws of War; deliver him from such unmerciful Death, for he is weak, governed 
by the strong. Oh Lord, save my beloved, who is Thine own son, from the foe, 
who is Thy foe. Keep him from the forced pathway to Death’s door; let him see 
me, or come and take me to him.” quietly a young man entered. His head was 
wrapped in bandage soaked with escaping life. 

He approached he with a greeting of tears and laughter, then took her hand and 
placed against it his flaming lips. And with a voice with bespoke past sorrow, 
and joy of union, and uncertainty of her reaction, he said, “Fear me not, for I am 
the object of your plea. Be glad, for Peace has carried me back safely to you, and 
humanity has restored what greed essayed to take from us. Be not sad, but smile, 
my beloved. Do not express bewilderment, for Love has power that dispels 
Death; charm that conquers the enemy. I am your one. Think me not a spectre 
emerging from the House of Death to visit your Home of Beauty. 

“Do not be frightened, for I am now Truth, spared from swords and fire to 
reveal to the people the triumph of Love over War. I am Word uttering 
introduction to the play of happiness and peace.” 

Then the young man became speechless and his tears spoke the language of 
the heart; and the angels of Joy hovered about that dwelling, and the two hearts 
restored the singleness which had been taken from them. 


At dawn the two stood in the middle of the field contemplating the beauty of 
Nature injured by the tempest. After a deep and comforting silence, the soldier 
said to his sweetheart, “Look at the Darkness, giving birth to the Sun.” 


The Playground of Life 


2 


SSP a | 


One hour devoted to the pursuit of beauty and love is worth a full century of 
glory given by the frightened weak to the strong. 

From that hour comes man’s Truth; and during that century truth sleeps 
between the restless arms of disturbing dreams. 

In that hour the soul sees for herself the natural law, and for that century she 
imprisons herself behind the law of man; and she is shackled with irons of 
oppression. 

That hour was the inspiration of the Songs of Solomon, and that century was 
the blind power which destroyed the temple of Baalbek. 

That hour was the birth of the Sermon on the Mount, and that century wrecked 
the castles of Palmyra and the Tower of Babylon. 

That hour was the Hegira of Mohammed and that century forgot Allah, 
Golgotha, and Sinai. 

One hour devoted to mourning and lamenting the stolen equality of the weak 
is nobler than a century filled with greed and usurpation. 

It is at that hour when the heart is purified by flaming sorrow and illuminated 
by the torch of love. 

And in that century, desires for truth are buried in the bosom of the earth. 

That hour is the root which must flourish. 

That hour of meditation, the hour of prayer, and the hour of a new era of 
good. 

And that century is a life of Nero spent on self-investment taken solely from 
earthly substance. 

This is life. 

Portrayed on the stage for ages; recorded earthly for centuries; lived in 
strangeness for years; sung as a hymn for days; exalted but for an hour, but the 


hour is treasured by eternity as a jewel. 


The City of the Dead 
(2 os = C) 


Yesterday I drew myself from the noisome throngs and proceeded into the field 
until I reached a knoll upon which Nature had spread her comely garments. Now 
I could breathe. 

I looked back, and the city appeared with its magnificent mosques and stately 
residences veiled by the smoke of the shops. 

I commenced analyzing man’s mission, but could conclude only that most of 
his life was identified with struggle and hardship. Then I tried not to ponder over 
what the sons of Adam had done, and centred my eyes on the field which is the 
throne of God’s glory. In one secluded corner of the field I observed a burying 
ground surrounded by poplar trees. 

There, between the city of the dead and the city of the living, I meditated. I 
thought of the eternal silence in the first and the endless sorrow in the second. 

In the city of the living I found hope and despair; love and hatred, joy and 
sorrow, wealth and poverty, faith and infidelity. 

In the city of the dead there is buried earth in earth that Nature converts, in the 
night’s silence, into vegetation, and then into animal, and then into man. As my 
mind wandered in this fashion, I saw a procession moving slowly and reverently, 
accompanied by pieces of music that filled the sky with sad melody. It was an 
elaborate funeral. The dead was followed by the living who wept and lamented 
his going. As the cortége reached the place of interment the priests commenced 
praying and burning incense, and musicians blowing and plucking their 
instruments, mourning the departed. Then the leaders came forward one after the 
other and recited their eulogies with fine choice of words. 

At last the multitude departed, leaving the dead resting in a most spacious and 
beautiful vault, expertly designed in stone and iron, and surrounded by the most 
expensively-entwined wreaths of flowers. 

The farewell-bidders returned to the city and I remained, watching them from 


a distance and speaking softly to myself while the sun was descending to the 
horizon and Nature was making her many preparations for slumber. 

Then I saw two men labouring under the weight of a wooden casket, and 
behind them a shabby-appearing woman carrying an infant on her arms. 
Following last was a dog who, with heartbreaking eyes, stared first at the woman 
and then at the casket. 

It was a poor funeral. This guest of Death left to cold society a miserable wife 
and an infant to share her sorrows and a faithful dog whose heart knew of his 
companion’s departure. 

As they reached the burial place they deposited the casket into a ditch away 
from the tended shrubs and marble stones, and retreated after a few simple words 
to God. The dog made one last turn to look at his friend’s grave as the small 
group disappeared behind the trees. 

I looked at the city of the living and said to myself, “That place belongs to the 
few.” Then I looked upon the trim city of the dead and said, “That place, too, 
belongs to the few. Oh Lord, where is the haven of all the people?” 

As I said this, I looked toward the clouds, mingled with the sun’s longest and 
most beautiful golden rays. And I heard a voice within me saying, “Over there!” 


The Widow and Her Son 
( = = C) 


Night fell over North Lebanon and snow was covering the villages surrounded 
by the Kadeesha Valley, giving the fields and prairies the appearance of a great 
sheet of parchment upon which the furious Nature was recording her many 
deeds. Men came home from the streets while silence engulfed the night. 

In a lone house near those villages lived a woman who sat by her fireside 
spinning wool, and at her side was her only child, staring now at the fire and 
then at his mother. 

A terrible roar of thunder shook the house and the little boy shook with fright. 
He threw his arms about his mother, seeking protection from Nature in her 
affection. She took him to her bosom and kissed him; then she say him on her 
lap and said, “Do not fear, my son, for Nature is but comparing her great power 
to man’s weakness. There is a Supreme Being beyond the falling snow and the 
heavy clouds and the blowing wind, and He knows the needs of the earth, for He 
made it; and He looks upon the weak with merciful eyes. 

“Be brave, my boy. Nature smiles in Spring and laughs in Summer and yawns 
in Autumn, but now she is weeping; and with her tears she waters life, hidden 
under the earth. 

“Sleep, my dear child; your father is viewing us from Eternity. The snow and 
thunder bring us closer to him at this time. 

“Sleep, my beloved, for this white blanket which makes us cold, keeps the 
seeds warm, and these war-like things will produce beautiful flowers when 
Nisan comes. 

“Thus, my child, man cannot reap love until after sad and revealing separation, 
and bitter patience, and desperate hardship. Sleep, my little boy; sweet dreams 
will find your soul who is unafraid of the terrible darkness of night and the biting 
frost.” 

The little boy looked upon his mother with sleep-laden eyes and said, “Mother, 


my eyes are heavy, but I cannot go to bed without saying my prayer.” 

The woman looked at his angelic face, her vision blurred by misted eyes, and 
said, “Repeat with me, my boy—‘God, have mercy on the poor and protect them 
from the winter; warm their thin-clad bodies with Thy merciful hands; look upon 
the orphans who are sleeping in wretched houses, suffering from hunger and 
cold. Hear, oh Lord, the call of widows who are helpless and shivering with fear 
for their young. Open, oh Lord, the hearts of all humans, that they may see the 
misery of the weak. Have mercy upon the sufferers who knock on doors, and 
lead the wayfarers into warm places. Watch, oh Lord, over the little birds and 
protect the trees and fields from the anger of the storm; for Thou art merciful and 
full of love.’” 

As Slumber captured the boy’s spirit, his mother placed him in the bed and 
kissed his eyes with quivering lips. Then she went back and sat by the hearth, 
spinning the wool to make him raiment. 


Song of the Soul 


In the depth of my soul there is a wordless song 
A song that lives in the seed of my heart. 

It refuses to melt with ink on parchment; 

It engulfs my affection in a transparent cloak 
And flows but not upon my lips. 


How can I sigh it? 

I fear it may mingle with earthly ether; 
To whom shall I sing it? 

It dwells in the house of my soul, 

In fear of harsh ears. 


When I look into my inner eyes I see the shadow of its shadow; 
When I touch my fingertips I feel its vibrations. 


The deeds of my hands heed its presence as a lake must reflect the glittering 
stars; 
My tears reveal it, as bright drops of dew reveal the secret of a withering rose. 


It is a song composed by contemplation, 
And published by silence, 

And shunned by clamour, 

And folded by truth, 

And repeated by dreams, 

And understood by love, 


And hidden by awakening, 
And sung by the soul. 


It is the song of love; 
What Cain or Esau could sing it? 


It is more fragrant than jasmine; 
What voice could enslave it? 


It is heart-bound, as a virgin’s secret; 
What string could quiver it? 


Who dares unite the roar of the sea 

And the singing of the nightingale? 

Who dares compare the shrieking tempest 
To the sigh of an infant? 

Who dares speak aloud the words 
Intended for the heart to speak? 

What human dares sing in voice 

The song of God? 


Song of the Flower 


2 


Tama kind word uttered and repeated by the voice of nature; 

Tama star fallen from the blue tent upon the green carpet. 

Iam the daughter of the elements with whom winter conceived; 

To whom Spring gave birth; 

I was reared in the lap of Summer and I slept in the bed of Autumn. 


At dawn I unite with the breeze to announce the coming of light; 
At eventide I join the birds in bidding the light farewell. 


The plains are decorated with my beautiful colours, 
And the air is scented with my fragrance. 


As I embrace slumber the eyes of night watch over me, 
And as I awaken I stare at the sun, 
Which is the only eye of the day. 


I drink dew for wine, and harken to the voices of the birds, 
And dance to the rhythmic swaying of the grass. 


Tam the lover’s gift; I am the wedding wreath; 
Iam the memory of a moment of happiness; 
Tam the last gift of the living to the dead; 
Tama part of joy and a part of sorrow. 


But I look up high to see only the light, 


And never look down to see my shadow. 
This is wisdom which man must learn. 


Song of Love 
(2 sy ~<a C) 


Iam the lover’s eyes, and the spirit’s wine, and the heart’s nourishment. 

Iam a rose. 

My heart opens at dawn and the virgin kisses me and places me upon her 
breast. 


IT am the house of true fortune, and the origin of pleasure, and the beginning of 
peace and tranquillity. 

IT am the gentle smile upon his lips of beauty. 

When youth overtakes me he forgets his toil, 

And his whole life becomes reality of sweet dreams. 


Tam the poet’s elation, 
And the artist’s revelation, 
And the musician’s inspiration. 


Iam asacred shrine in the heart of a child, adored by a merciful mother. 


I appear to a heart’s cry; I shun a demand; 
My fullness pursues the heart’s desire; 
It shuns the empty claim of the voice. 


I appeared to Adam through Eve 
And exile was his lot; 
Yet I revealed myself to Solomon, and he drew wisdom from my presence. 


I smiled at Helena and she destroyed Tarwada; 
Yet I crowned Cleopatra and peace dominated the Valley of the Nile. 


I am like the ages—building today and destroying tomorrow; 
T am like a god, who creates and ruins; 

Iam sweeter than a violet’s sigh; 

Iam more violent than a raging tempest. 


Gifts alone do not entice me; 

Parting does not discourage me; 
Poverty does not chase me; 

Jealousy does not prove my awareness; 
Madness does not evidence my presence. 


Oh seekers, I am Truth, beseeching Truth; 
And your Truth in seeking and receiving 
And protecting me shall determine my behaviour. 


Song of Man 


I was here from the moment of the beginning, and here I am still. 
And I shall remain here until the end of the world, 
For there is no ending to my grief-stricken being. 


I roamed the infinite sky, and soared in the ideal world, and floated through 
the firmament. 
But here I am, prisoner of measurement. 


I heard the teachings of Confucius; 

I listened to Brahma’s wisdom; 

I sat by Buddha under the Tree of Knowledge. 

Yet here I am, existing with ignorance and heresy. 


I was on Sinai when Jehovah approached Moses; 
I saw the Nazarene’s miracles at the Jordan; 

I was in Medina when Mohammed visited. 

Yet I here I am, prisoner of bewilderment. 


Then I witnessed the might of Babylon; 
I learned of the glory of Egypt; 
I viewed the warring greatness of Rome. 


Yet my earlier teachings showed the weakness and sorrow of those 
achievements. 


I conversed with the magicians of Ain Dour; 


I debated with the priests of Assyria; 
I gleaned depth from the prophets of Palestine. 
Yet, I am still seeking truth. 


I gathered wisdom from quiet India; 
I probed the antiquity of Arabia; 

I heard all that can be heard. 

Yet, my heart is deaf and blind. 


I suffered at the hands of despotic rulers; 

I suffered slavery under insane invaders; 

I suffered hunger imposed by tyranny; 

Yet, I still possess some inner power with which I struggle to greet each day. 


My mind is filled, but my heart is empty; 

My body is old, but my heart is an infant. 

Perhaps in youth my heart will grow, 

But I pray to grow old and reach the moment of my return to God. 
Only then will my heart fill! 


I was here from the moment of the beginning, and here I am still. 
And I shall remain here until the end of world, 
For there is no ending to my grief-stricken being. 


Before the Throne of Beauty 
(2 ~ = C) 


One heavy day I ran away from the grim face of society and the dizzying 
clamour of the city and directed my weary step to the spacious alley. I pursued 
the beckoning course of the rivulet and the musical sounds of the birds until I 
reached a lonely spot where the flowing branches of the trees prevented the sun 
from the touching the earth. 

I stood there, and it was entertaining to my soul—my thirsty soul who had 
seen naught but the mirage of life instead of its sweetness. 

I was engrossed deeply in thought and my spirits were sailing the firmament 
when a hour, wearing a sprig of grapevine that covered part of her naked body, 
and a wreath of poppies about her golden hair, suddenly appeared to me. As she 
realized my astonishment, she greeted me saying, “Fear me not; I am the Nymph 
of the Jungle.” 

“How can beauty like yours be committed to live in this place? Please tell me 
who you are, and whence you come?” I asked. She sat gracefully on the green 
grass and responded, “I am the symbol of nature! I am the ever virgin your 
forefathers worshipped, and to my honour they erected shrines and temples at 
Baalbek and Jbeil.” And I dared say, “But those temples and shrines were laid 
waste and the bones of my adoring ancestors became a part of the earth; nothing 
was left to commemorate their goddess save a pitiful few and the forgotten pages 
in the book of history.” 

She replied, “Some goddesses live in the lives of their worshippers and die in 
their deaths, while some live an eternal and infinite life. My life is sustained by 
the world of beauty which you will see where ever you rest your eyes, and this 
beauty is nature itself; it is the beginning of the shepherds joy among the hills, 
and a villagers happiness in the fields, and the pleasure of the awe filled tribes 
between the mountains and the plains. This Beauty promotes the wise into the 
throne the truth.” 


Then I said, “Beauty is a terrible power!” And she retorted, “Human beings 
fear all things, even yourselves. You fear heaven, the source of spiritual peace; 
you fear nature, the haven of rest and tranquillity; you fear the God of goodness 
and accuse him of anger, while he is full of love and mercy.” 

After a deep silence, mingled with sweet dreams, I asked, “Speak to me of that 
beauty which the people interpret and define, each one according to his own 
conception; I have seen her honoured and worshipped in different ways and 
manners.” 

She answered, “Beauty is that which attracts your soul, and that which loves to 
give and not to receive. When you meet Beauty, you feel that the hands deep 
within your inner self are stretched forth to bring her into the domain of your 
heart. It is the magnificence combined of sorrow and joy; it is the Unseen which 
you see, and the Vague which you understand, and the Mute which you hear—it 
is the Holy of Holies that begins in yourself and ends vastly beyond your earthly 
imagination.” 

Then the Nymph of the Jungle approached me and laid her scented hands upon 
my eyes. And as she withdrew, I found me alone in the valley. When I returned 
to the city, whose turbulence no longer vexed me, I repeated her words: 

“Beauty is that which attracts your soul, and that which loves to give and not 
to receive.” 


A Lover’s Call 
‘e) - a C) 


Where are you, my beloved? Are you in that little paradise, watering the flowers 
who look upon you as infants look upon the breast of their mothers? 

Or are you in your chamber where the shrine of virtue has been placed in your 
honour, and upon which you offer my heart and soul as sacrifice? 

Or amongst the books, seeking human knowledge, while you are replete with 
heavenly wisdom? 

Oh companion of my soul, where are you? Are you praying in the temple? Or 
calling Nature in the field, haven of your dreams? 

Are you in the huts of the poor, consoling the broken-hearted with the 
sweetness of your soul, and filling their hands with your bounty? 

You are God’s spirit everywhere; you are stronger than the ages. 

Do you have memory of the day we met, when the halo of your spirit 
surrounded us, and the Angels of Love floated about, singing the praise of the 
soul’s deed? 

Do you recollect our sitting in the shade of the branches, sheltering ourselves 
from humanity, as the ribs protect the divine secret of the heart from injury? 

Remember you the trails and forest we walked, with hands joined, and our 
heads leaning against each other, as if we were hiding ourselves within 
ourselves? 

Recall you the hour I bade you farewell, and the maritime kiss you placed on 
my lips? That kiss taught me that joining of lips in love reveals heavenly secrets 
which the tongue cannot utter! 

That kiss was introduction to a great sigh, like the Almighty’s breath that 
turned earth into man. 

That sigh led my way into the spiritual world announcing the glory of my soul; 
and there it shall perpetuate until again we meet. 


I remember when you kissed me and kissed me, with tears coursing your 


cheeks, and you said, “earthly bodies must often separate for earthly purpose, 
and must live apart impelled by worldly intent. 

“But the spirit remains joined safely in the hands of love, until death arrives 
and takes joined souls to God. 

“Go, my beloved; love has chosen you her delegate; over her, for she is beauty 
who offers to her follower the cup of the sweetness of life. As for my own empty 
arms, your love shall remain my comforting groom; you memory, my eternal 
wedding.” 

Where are you now, my other self? Are you awake in the silence of the night? 
Let the clean breeze convey to you my heart’s every beat and affection. 

Are you fondling my face in your memory? That image is no longer my own, 
for sorrow has dropped his shadow on my happy countenance of the past. 

Sobs have withered my eyes which reflected your beauty and dried my lips 
which you sweetened with kisses. 

Where are you, my beloved? Do you hear my weeping from beyond the 
ocean? Do you understand my need? Do you know the greatness of my 
patience? 

Is there any spirit in the air capable of conveying to you the breath of this 
dying youth? Is there any secret communication between angels that will carry to 
you my complaint? 

Where are you, my beautiful star? The obscurity of life has cast me upon its 
bosom; sorrow has conquered me. 

Sail your smile into the air; it will reach and enliven me! Breathe your 
fragrance into the air; it will sustain me! 

Where are you, my beloved? 

Oh, how great is Love! 

And how little am I! 


The Palace and the Hut 
2. a a C) 


Part One 


As night fell and the light glittered in the great house, the servants stood at the 
massive door awaiting the coming of the guests; and upon their velvet garments 
shown golden buttons. 

The magnificent carriages drew into the palace park and the nobles entered, 
dressed in gorgeous raiment and decorated with jewels. The instruments filled 
the air with pleasant melodies while the dignitaries danced to the soothing 
music. 

At midnight the finest and most palatable foods were served on a beautiful 
table embellished with all kinds of the rarest flowers. The feasters dined and 
drank abundantly, until the sequence of the wine began to play its part. At dawn 
the throng dispersed boisterously, after spending a long night of intoxication and 
gluttony which hurried their worn bodies into their deep beds with unnatural 
sleep. 


Part Two 


At eventide, a man attired in the dress of heavy work stood before the door of his 
small house and knocked at the door. As it opened, he entered and greeted the 
occupants in a cheerful manner, and then sat between his children who were 
playing at the fireplace. In a short time, his wife had the meal prepared and they 
sat at a wooden table consuming their food. After eating they gathered around 
the oil lamp and talked of the day’s events. When the early night had lapsed, all 
stood silently and surrendered themselves to the King of Slumber with a song of 


praise and a prayer of gratitude on their lips. 


THE BROKEN WINGS 


Foreword 


I was eighteen years of age when love opened my eyes with its magic rays and 
touched my spirit for the first time with its fiery fingers, and Selma Karamy was 
the first woman who awakened my spirit with her beauty and led me into the 
garden of high affection, where days pass like dreams and nights like weddings. 

Selma Karamy was the one who taught me to worship beauty by the example 
of her own beauty and revealed to me the secret of love by her affection; she was 
the one who first sang to me the poetry of real life. 

Every young man remembers his first love and tries to recapture that strange 
hour, the memory of which changes his deepest feeling and makes him so happy 
in spite of all the bitterness of its mystery. 

In every young man’s life there is a “Selma” who appears to him suddenly 
while in the spring of life and transforms his solitude into happy moments and 
fills the silence of his nights with music. 

I was deeply engrossed in thought and contemplation and seeking to 
understand the meaning of nature and the revelation of books and scriptures 
when I heard LOVE whispered into my ears through Selma’s lips. My life was a 
coma, empty like that of Adam’s in Paradise, when I saw Selma standing before 
me like a column of light. She was the Eve of my heart who filled it with secrets 
and wonders and made me understand the meaning of life. 

The first Eve led Adam out of Paradise by her own will, while Selma made me 
enter willingly into the paradise of pure love and virtue by her sweetness and 
love; but what happened to the first man also happened to me, and the fiery word 
which chased Adam out of Paradise was like the one which frightened me by its 
glittering edge and forced me away from paradise of my love without having 
disobeyed any order or tasted the fruit of the forbidden tree. 

Today, after many years have passed, I have nothing left out of that beautiful 
dream except painful memories flapping like invisible wings around me, filling 


the depths of my heart with sorrow, and bringing tears to my eyes; and my 
beloved, beautiful Selma, is dead and nothing is left to commemorate her except 
my broken heart and tomb surrounded by cypress trees. That tomb and this heart 
are all that is left to bear witness of Selma. 

The silence that guards the tomb does not reveal God’s secret in the obscurity 
of the coffin, and the rustling of the branches whose roots suck the body’s 
elements do not tell the mysteries of the grave, by the agonized sighs of my heart 
announce to the living the drama which love, beauty, and death have performed. 

Oh, friends of my youth who are scattered in the city of Beirut, when you pass 
by the cemetery near the pine forest, enter it silently and walk slowly so the 
tramping of your feet will not disturb the slumber of the dead, and stop humbly 
by Selma’s tomb and greet the earth that encloses her corpse and mention my 
name with deep sigh and say to yourself, “here, all the hopes of Gibran, who is 
living as prisoner of love beyond the seas, were buried. On this spot he lost his 
happiness, drained his tears, and forgot his smile.” 

By that tomb grows Gibran’s sorrow together with the cypress trees, and above 
the tomb his spirit flickers every night commemorating Selma, joining the 
branches of the trees in sorrowful wailing, mourning and lamenting the going of 
Selma, who, yesterday was a beautiful tune on the lips of life and today is a 
silent secret in the bosom of the earth. 

Oh, comrades of my youth! I appeal to you in the names of those virgins 
whom your hearts have loved, to lay a wreath of flowers on the forsaken tomb of 
my beloved, for the flowers you lay on Selma’s tomb are like falling drops of 
dew for the eyes of dawn on the leaves of withering rose. 


Chapter One 
Silent Sorrow 
(> = = C) 


My neighbours, you remember the dawn of youth with pleasure and regret its 
passing; but I remember it like a prisoner who recalls the bars and shackles of 
his jail. You speak of those years between infancy and youth as a golden era free 
from confinement and cares, but I call those years an era of silent sorrow which 
dropped as a seed into my heart and grew with it and could find no outlet to the 
world of Knowledge and wisdom until love came and opened the heart’s doors 
and lighted its corners. Love provided me with a tongue and tears. You people 
remember the gardens and orchids and the meeting places and street corners that 
witnessed your games and heard your innocent whispering; and I remember, too, 
the beautiful spot in North Lebanon. Every time I close my eyes I see those 
valleys full of magic and dignity and those mountains covered with glory and 
greatness trying to reach the sky. Every time I shut my ears to the clamour of the 
city I hear the murmur of the rivulets and the rustling of the branches. All those 
beauties which I speak of now and which I long to see, as a child longs for his 
mother’s breast, wounded my spirit, imprisoned in the darkness of youth, as a 
falcon suffers in its cage when it sees a flock of birds flying freely in the 
spacious sky. Those valleys and hills fired my imagination, but bitter thoughts 
wove round my heart a net of hopelessness. 

Every time I went to the fields I returned disappointed, without understanding 
the cause of my disappointment. Every time I looked at the grey sky I felt my 
heart contract. Every time I heard the singing of the birds and babbling of the 
spring I suffered without understanding the reason for my suffering. It is said 
that unsophistication makes a man empty and that emptiness makes him 
carefree. It may be true among those who were born dead and who exist like 
frozen corpses; but the sensitive boy who feels much and knows little is the most 
unfortunate creature under the sun, because he is torn by two forces. The first 


force elevates him and shows him the beauty of existence through a cloud of 
dreams; the second ties him down to the earth and fills his eyes with dust and 
overpowers him with fears and darkness. 

Solitude has soft, silky hands, but with strong fingers it grasps the heart and 
makes it ache with sorrow. Solitude is the ally of sorrow as well as a companion 
of spiritual exaltation. 

The boy’s soul undergoing the buffeting of sorrow is like a white lily just 
unfolding. It trembles before the breeze and opens its heart to day break and 
folds its leaves back when the shadow of night comes. If that boy does not have 
diversion or friends or companions in his games his life will be like a narrow 
prison in which he sees nothing but spider webs and hears nothing but the 
crawling of insects. 

That sorrow which obsessed me during my youth was not caused by lack of 
amusement, because I could have had it; neither from lack of friends, because I 
could have found them. That sorrow was caused by an inward ailment which 
made me love solitude. It killed in me the inclination for games and amusement. 
It removed from my shoulders the wings of youth and made me like a pong of 
water between mountains which reflects in its calm surface the shadows of 
ghosts and the colours of clouds and trees, but cannot find an outlet by which to 
pass singing to the sea. 

Thus was my life before I attained the age of eighteen. That year is like a 
mountain peak in my life, for it awakened knowledge in me and made me 
understand the vicissitudes of mankind. In that year I was reborn and unless a 
person is born again his life will remain like a blank sheet in the book of 
existence. In that year, I saw the angels of heaven looking at me through the eyes 
of a beautiful woman. I also saw the devils of hell raging in the heart of an evil 
man. He who does not see the angels and devils in the beauty and malice of life 
will be far removed from knowledge, and his spirit will be empty of affection. 


Chapter Two 
The Hand of Destiny 
(? = = C) 


In the spring of the that wonderful year, I was in Beirut. The gardens were full of 
Nisan flowers and the earth was carpeted with green grass, and like a secret of 
earth revealed to Heaven. The orange trees and apple trees, looking like houris 
or brides sent by nature to inspire poets and excite the imagination, were wearing 
white garments of perfumed blossoms. 

Spring is beautiful everywhere, but it is most beautiful in Lebanon. It is a spirit 
that roams round the earth but hovers over Lebanon, conversing with kings and 
prophets, singing with the rives the songs of Solomon, and repeating with the 
Holy Cedars of Lebanon the memory of ancient glory. Beirut, free from the mud 
of winter and the dust of summer, is like a bride in the spring, or like a mermaid 
sitting by the side of a brook drying her smooth skin in the rays of the sun. 

One day, in the month of Nisan, I went to visit a friend whose home was at 
some distance from the glamorous city. As we were conversing, a dignified man 
of about sixty-five entered the house. As I rose to greet him, my friend 
introduced him to me as Farris Effandi Karamy and then gave him my name 
with flattering words. The old man looked at me a moment, touching his 
forehead with the ends of his fingers as if he were trying to regain his memory. 
Then he smilingly approached me saying, “You are the son of a very dear friend 
of mine, and I am happy to see that friend in your person.” 

Much affected by his words, I was attracted to him like a bird whose instinct 
leads him to his nest before the coming of the tempest. As we sat down, he told 
us about his friendship with my father, recalling the time which they spent 
together. An old man likes to return in memory to the days of his youth like a 
stranger who longs to go back to his own country. He delights to tell stories of 
the past like a poet who takes pleasure in reciting his best poem. He lives 
spiritually in the past because the present passes swiftly, and the future seems to 


him an approach to the oblivion of the grave. An hour full of old memories 
passed like the shadows of the trees over the grass. When Farris Effandi started 
to leave, he put his left hand on my shoulder and shook my right hand, saying, “I 
have not seen your father for twenty years. I hope you will | take his place in 
frequent visits to my house.” I promised gratefully to do my duty toward a dear 
friend of my father. 

Then the old man left the house, I asked my friend to tell me more about him. 
He said, “I do not know any other man in Beirut whose wealth has made him 
kind and whose kindness has made him wealthy. He is one of the few who come 
to this world and leave it without harming any one, but people of that kind are 
usually miserable and oppressed because they are not clever enough to save 
themselves from the crookedness of others. Farris Effandi has one daughter 
whose character is similar to his and whose beauty and gracefulness are beyond 
description, and she will also be miserable because her father’s wealth is placing 
her already at the edge of a horrible precipice.” 

As he uttered these words, I noticed that his face clouded. Then he continued, 
“Farris Effandi is a good old man with a noble heart, but he lacks will power. 
People lead him like a blind man. His daughter obeys him in spite of her pride 
and intelligence, and this is the secret which lurks in the life of father and 
daughter. This secret was discovered by an evil man who is a bishop and whose 
wickedness hides in the shadow of his Gospel. He makes the people believe that 
he is kind and noble. He is the head of religion in this land of the religions. The 
people obey and worship him. he leads them like a flock of lambs to the 
slaughter house. This bishop has a nephew who is full of hatefulness and 
corruption. The day will come sooner or later when he will place his nephew on 
his right and Farris Effandi’s daughter on this left, and, holding with his evil 
hand the wreath of matrimony over their heads, will tie a pure virgin to a filthy 
degenerate, placing the heart of the day in the bosom of the night. 

That is all I can tell you about Farris Effandi and his daughter, so do not ask 
me any more questions.” 

Saying this, he turned his head toward the window as if he were trying to solve 
the problems of human existence by concentrating on the beauty of the universe. 

As I left the house I told my friend that I was going to visit Farris Effandi in a 
few days for the purpose of fulfilling my promise and for the sake of the 
friendship which had joined him and my father. He stared at me for a moment, 
and I noticed a change in his expression as if my few simple words had revealed 


to him a new idea. Then he looked straight through my eyes in a strange manner, 
a look of love, mercy, and fear—the look of a prophet who foresees what no one 
else can divine. Then his lips trembled a little, but he said nothing when I started 
towards the door. That strange look followed me, the meaning of which I could 
not understand until I grew up in the world of experience, where hearts 
understand each other intuitively and where spirits are mature with knowledge. 


Chapter Three 
Entrance to the Shrine 
(> = = C) 


In a few days, loneliness overcame me; and I tired of the grim faces of books; I 
hired a carriage and started for the house of Farris Effandi. As I reached the pine 
woods where people went for picnics, the driver took a private way, shaded with 
willow trees on each side. Passing through, we could see the beauty of the green 
grass, the grapevines, and the many coloured flowers of Nisan just blossoming. 

In a few minutes the carriage stopped before a solitary house in the midst of a 
beautiful garden. The scent of roses, gardenia, and jasmine filled the air. As I 
dismounted and entered the spacious garden, I saw Farris Effandi coming to 
meet me. He ushered me into his house with a hearty welcome and sat by me, 
like a happy father when he sees his son, showering me with questions on my 
life, future and education. I answered him, my voice full of ambition and zeal; 
for I heard ringing in my ears the hymn of glory, and I was sailing the calm sea 
of hopeful dreams. Just then a beautiful young woman, dressed in a gorgeous 
white silk gown, appeared from behind the velvet curtains of the door and 
walked toward me. Farris Effandi and I rose from our seats. 

This is my daughter Selma,” said the old man. Then he introduced me to her, 
saying, “Fate has brought back to me a dear old friend of mine in the person of 
his son.” Selma stared at me a moment as if doubting that a visitor could have 
entered their house. Her hand, when I touched it, was like a white lily, and a 
strange pang pierced my heart. 

We all sat silent as if Selma had brought into the room with her heavenly spirit 
worthy of mute respect. As she felt the silence she smiled at me and said,” Many 
a times my father has repeated to me the stories of his youth and of the old days 
he and your father spent together. If your father spoke to you in the same way, 
then this meeting is not the first one between us.” 

The old man was delighted to hear his daughter talking in such a manner and 


said, “Selma is very sentimental. She sees everything through the eyes of the 
spirit.” Then he resumed his conversation with care and tact as if he had found in 
me a magic which took him on the wings of memory to the days of the past. 

As I considered him, dreaming of my own later years, he looked upon me, as a 
lofty old tree that has withstood storms and sunshine throws its shadow upon a 
small sapling which shakes before the breeze of dawn. 

But Selma was silent. Occasionally, she looked first at me and then at her 
father as if reading the first and last chapters of life’s drama. The day passed 
faster in that garden, and I could see through the window the ghostly yellow kiss 
of sunset on the mountains of Lebanon. Farris Effandi continued to recount his 
experiences and I listened entranced and responded with such enthusiasm that 
his sorrow was changed to happiness. 

Selma sat by the window, looking on with sorrowful eyes and not speaking, 
although beauty has its own heavenly language, loftier than he voices of tongues 
and lips. It is a timeless language, common to all humanity, a calm lake that 
attracts the singing rivulets to its depth and makes them silent. 

Only our spirits can understand beauty, or live and grow with it. It puzzles our 
minds; we are unable to describe it in words; it is a sensation that our eyes 
cannot see, derived from both the one who observes and the one who is looked 
upon. Real beauty is a ray which emanates from the holy of holies of the spirit, 
and illuminates the body, as life comes from the depths of the earth and gives 
colour and scent to a flower. 

Real beauty lies in the spiritual accord that is called love which can exist 
between a man and a woman. 

Did my spirit and Selma’s reach out to each other that day when we met, and 
did that yearning make me see her as the most beautiful woman under the sun? 
Or was I intoxicated with the wine of youth which made me fancy that which 
never existed? 

Did my youth blind my natural eyes and make me imagine the brightness of 
her eyes, the sweetness of her mouth, and the grace of her figure? Or was it that 
her brightness, sweetness, and grace opened my eyes and showed me the 
happiness and sorrow of love? 

It is hard to answer these questions, but I say truly that in that hour I felt an 
emotion that I had never felt before, a new affection resting calmly in my heart, 
like the spirit hovering over the waters at the creation of the world, and from that 
affection was born my happiness and my sorrow. Thus ended the hour of my first 


meeting with Selma, and thus the will of Heaven freed me from the bondage of 
youth and solitude and let me walk in the procession of love. 

Love is the only freedom in the world because it so elevates the spirit that the 
laws of humanity and the phenomena of nature do not alter its course. 

As I rose from my seat to depart, Farris Effandi came close to me and said 
soberly, “Now my son, since you know your way to this house, you should come 
often and feel that you are coming to your father’s house. Consider me as a 
father and Selma as a sister.” Saying this, he turned to Selma as if to ask 
confirmation of his statement. She nodded her head positively and then looked at 
me as one who has found an old acquaintance. 

Those words uttered by Farris Effandi Karamy placed me side by side with his 
daughter at the altar of love. Those words were a heavenly song which started 
with exaltation and ended with sorrow; they raised our spirits to the realm of 
light and searing flame; they were the cup from which we drank happiness and 
bitterness. 

I left the house. The old man accompanied me to the edge of the garden, while 
my heart throbbed like the trembling lips of a thirsty man. 


Chapter Four 


The White Torch 
O = = C) 


The month of Nisan had nearly passed. I continued to visit the home of Farris 
Effendi and to meet Selma in that beautiful garden, gazing upon her beauty, 
marvelling at her intelligence, and hearing the stillness of sorrow. I felt an 
invisible hand drawing me to her. 

Every visit gave me a new meaning to her beauty and a new insight into her 
sweet spirit, Until she became a book whose pages I could understand and whose 
praises I could sing, but which I could never finish reading. A woman whom 
Providence has provided with beauty of spirit and body is a truth, at the same 
time both open and secret, which we can understand only by love, and touch 
only by virtue; and when we attempt to describe such a woman she disappears 
like vapour. 

Selma Karamy had bodily and spiritual beauty, but how can I describe her to 
one who never knew her? Can a dead man remember the singing of a nightingale 
and the fragrance of a rose and the sigh of a brook? Can a prisoner who is 
heavily loaded with shackles follow the breeze of the dawn? Is not silence more 
painful than death? Does pride prevent me from describing Selma in plain words 
since I cannot draw her truthfully with luminous colours? A hungry man in a 
desert will not refuse to eat dry bread if Heaven does not shower him with 
manna and quails. 

In her white silk dress, Selma was slender as a ray of moonlight coming 
through the window. She walked gracefully and rhythmically. Her voice was low 
and sweet; words fell from her lips like drops of dew falling from the petals of 
flowers when they are disturbed by the wind. 

But Selma’s face! No words can describe its expression, reflecting first great 
internal suffering, then heavenly exaltation. 


The beauty of Selma’s face was not classic; it was like a dream of revelation 


which cannot be measured or bound or copied by the brush of a painter or the 
chisel of a sculptor. Selma’s beauty was not in her golden hair, but in the virtue 
of purity which surrounded it; not in her large eyes, but in the light which 
emanated from them; not in her red lips, but in the sweetness of her words; not 
in her ivory neck, but in its slight bow to the front. Nor was it in her perfect 
figure, but in the nobility of her spirit, burning like a white torch between earth 
and sky. Her beauty was like a gift of poetry. But poets care unhappy people, for, 
no matter how high their spirits reach, they will still be enclosed in an envelope 
of tears. 

Selma was deeply thoughtful rather than talkative, and her silence was a kind 
of music that carried one to a world of dreams and made him listen to the 
throbbing of his heart, and see the ghosts of his thoughts and feelings standing 
before him, looking him in the eyes. 

She wore a cloak of deep sorrow through her life, which increased her strange 
beauty and dignity, as a tree in blossom is more lovely when seen through the 
mist of dawn. 

Sorrow linked her spirit and mine, as if each saw in the other’s face what the 
heart was feeling and heard the echo of a hidden voice. God had made two 
bodies in one, and separation could be nothing but agony. 

The sorrowful spirit finds rest when united with a similar one. They join 
affectionately, as a stranger is cheered when he sees another stranger in a strange 
land. Hearts that are united through the medium of sorrow will not be separated 
by the glory of happiness. Love that is cleansed by tears will remain externally 
pure and beautiful. 


Chapter Five 
The Tempest 
(2 = = C) 


One day Farris Effandi invited me to dinner at his home. I accepted, my spirit 
hungry for the divine bread which Heaven placed in the hands of Selma, the 
spiritual bread which makes our hearts hungrier the more we eat of it. It was this 
bread which Kais, the Arabian poet, Dante, and Sappho tasted and which set 
their hearts afar; the bread which the Goddess prepares with the sweetness of 
kisses and the bitterness of tears. 

As I reached the home of Farris Effandi, I saw Selma sitting on a bench in the 
garden resting her head against a tree and looking like a bride in her white silk 
dress, or like a sentinel guarding that place. 

Silently and reverently I approached and sat by her. I could not talk; so I 
resorted to silence, the only language of the heart, but I felt that Selma was 
listening to my wordless call and watching the ghost of my soul in my eyes. 

In a few minutes the old man came out and greeted me as usual. When he 
stretched his hand toward me, I felt as if he were blessing the secrets that united 
me and his daughter. Then he said, “Dinner is ready, my children; let us eat. “We 
rose and followed him, and Selma’s eyes brightened; for a new sentiment had 
been added to her love by her father’s calling us his children. 

We sat at the table enjoying the food and sipping the old wine, but our souls 
were living in a world far away. We were dreaming of the future and its 
hardships. 

Three persons were separated in thoughts, but united in love; three innocent 
people with much feeling but little knowledge; a drama was being performed by 
an old man who loved his daughter and cared for her happiness, a young woman 
of twenty looking into the future with anxiety, and a young man, dreaming and 
worrying, who had tasted neither the wine of life nor its vinegar, and trying to 
reach the height of love and knowledge but unable to life himself up. We three 


sitting in twilight were eating and drinking in that solitary home, guarded by 
Heaven’s eyes, but at the bottoms of our glasses were hidden bitterness and 
anguish. 

As we finished eating, one of the maids announced the presence of a man at 
the door who wished to see Farris Effandi. “Who is he?” asked the old man. 
“The Bishop’s messenger,” said the maid. There was a moment of silence during 
which Farris Effandi stared at his daughter like a prophet who gazes at Heaven 
to divine its secret. Then he said to the maid, “Let the man in.” 

As the maid left, a man, dressed in oriental uniform and with big moustache 
curled at the ends, entered and greeted the old man, saying “His Grace, the 
Bishop, has sent me for you with his private carriage; he wishes to discuss 
important business with you.” The old man’s face clouded and his smile 
disappeared. After a moment of deep thought he came close to me and said in a 
friendly voice, “I hope to find you here when I come back, for Selma will enjoy 
your company in this solitary place.” 

Saying this, he turned to Selma and, smiling, asked if she agreed. She nodded 
her head, but her cheeks became red, and with a voice sweeter than the music of 
the lyre she said, “I will do my best, Father, to make our guest happy.” 

Selma watched the carriage that had taken her father and the Bishop’s 
messenger until it disappeared. Then she came and sat opposite me on a divan 
covered with green silk. She looked like a lily bent to the carpet of green grass 
by the breeze of dawn. It was the will of Heaven that I should be with Selma 
alone, at night, in her beautiful home surrounded by trees, where silence, love, 
beauty and virtue dwelt together. 

We were both silent, each waiting for the other to speak, but speech is not the 
only means of understanding between two souls. It is not the syllables that come 
from the lips and tongues that bring hearts together. 

There is something greater and purer than what the mouth utters. Silence 
illuminates our souls, whispers to our hearts, and brings them together. Silence 
separates us from ourselves, makes us sail the firmament of spirit, and brings us 
closer to Heaven; it makes us feel that bodies are no more than prisons and that 
this world is only a place of exile. 

Selma looked at me and her eyes revealed the secret of her heart. Then she 
quietly said, “Let us go to the garden and sit under the trees and watch the moon 
come up behind the mountains.” Obediently I rose from my seat, but I hesitated. 

Don’t you think we had better stay here until the moon has risen and 


illuminates the garden?” And I continued, “The darkness hides the trees and 
flowers. We can see nothing.” 

Then she said, “If darkness hides the trees and flowers from our eyes, it will 
not hide love from our hearts.” 

Uttering these words in a strange tone, she turned her eyes and looked through 
the window. I remained silent, pondering her words, weighing the true meaning 
of each syllable. Then she looked at me as if she regretted what she had said and 
tried to take away those words from my ears by the magic of her eyes. But those 
eyes, instead of making me forget what she had said, repeated through the depths 
of my heart more clearly and effectively the sweet words which had already 
become graven in my memory for eternity. 

Every beauty and greatness in this world is created by a single thought or 
emotion inside a man. Everything we see today, made by past generation, was, 
before its appearance, a thought in the mind of a man or an impulse in the heart 
of a woman. The revolutions that shed so much blood and turned men’s minds 
toward liberty were the idea of one man who lived in the midst of thousands of 
men. The devastating wars which destroyed empires were a thought that existed 
in the mind of an individual. The supreme teachings that changed the course of 
humanity were the ideas of a man whose genius separated him from his 
environment. A single thought build the Pyramids, founded the glory of Islam, 
and caused the burning of the library at Alexandria. 

One thought will come to you at night which will elevate you to glory or lead 
you to asylum. One look from a woman’s eye makes you the happiest man in the 
world. One word from a man’s lips will make you rich or poor. 

That word which Selma uttered that night arrested me between my past and 
future, as a boat which is anchored in the midst of the ocean. That word 
awakened me from the slumber of youth and solitude and set me on the stage 
where life and death play their parts. 

The scent of flowers mingled with the breeze as we came into the garden and 
sat silently on a bench near a jasmine tree, listening to the breathing of sleeping 
nature, while in the blue sky the eyes of heaven witnessed our drama. 

The moon came out from behind Mount Sunnin and shone over the coast, 
hills, and mountains; and we could see the villages fringing the valley like 
apparitions which have suddenly been conjured from nothing. We could see the 
beauty of Lebanon under the silver rays of the moon. 

Poets of the West think of Lebanon as a legendary place, forgotten since the 


passing of David and Solomon and the Prophets, as the Garden of Eden became 
lost after the fall of Adam and Eve. To those Western poets, the word “Lebanon” 
is a poetical expression associated with a mountain whose sides are drenched 
with the incense of the Holy Cedars. It reminds them of the temples of copper 
and marble standing stern and impregnable and of a herd of deer feeding in the 
valleys. That night I saw Lebanon dream-like with the eyes of a poet. 

Thus, the appearance of things changes according to the emotions, and thus we 
see magic and beauty in them, while the magic and beauty are really in 
ourselves. 

As the rays of the moon shone on the face, neck, and arms of Selma, she 
looked like a statue of ivory sculptured by the fingers of some worshiper of 
Ishtar, goddess of beauty and love. As she looked at me, she said, “Why are you 
silent? Why do you not tell me something about your past?” As I gazed at her, 
my muteness vanished, and I opened my lips and said, “Did you not hear what I 
said when we came to this orchard? The spirit that hears the whispering of 
flowers and the singing of silence can also hear the shrieking of my soul and the 
clamour of my heart.” 

She covered her face with her hands and said in a trembling voice, “Yes, I 
heard you—I heard a voice coming from the bosom of night and a clamour 
raging in the heart of the day.” 

Forgetting my past, my very existence—everything but Selma—I answered 
her, saying, “And I heard you, too, Selma. I heard exhilarating music pulsing in 
the air and causing the whole universe to tremble.” 

Upon hearing these words, she closed her eyes and her lips I saw a smile of 
pleasure mingled with sadness. She whispered softly, “Now I know that there is 
something higher than heaven and deeper than the ocean and stranger than life 
and death and time. I know now what I did not know before.” 

At that moment Selma became dearer than a friend and closer than a sister and 
more beloved than a sweetheart. She became a supreme thought, a beautiful, an 
overpowering emotion living in my spirit. 

It is wrong to think that love comes from long companionship and persevering 
courtship. Love is the offspring of spiritual affinity and unless that affinity is 
created in a moment, it will not be created in years or even generations. 

Then Selma raised her head and gazed at the horizon where Mount Sunnin 
meets the sky, and said, “Yesterday you were like a brother to me, with whom I 
lived and by whom I sat calmly under my father’s care. Now, I feel the presence 


of something stranger and sweeter than brotherly affection, an unfamiliar 
commingling of love and fear that fills my heart with sorrow and happiness.” 

I responded, “This emotion which we fear and which shakes us when it passes 
through our hearts is the law of nature that guides the moon around the earth and 
the sun around the God.” 

She put her hand on my head and wove her fingers through my hair. Her face 
brightened and tears came out of her eyes like drops of dew on the leaves of a 
lily, and she said, “Who would believe our story—who would believe that in this 
hour we have surmounted the obstacles of doubt? Who would believe that the 
month of Nisan which brought us together for the first time, is the month that 
halted us in the Holy of Holies of life?” 

Her hand was still on my head as she spoke, and I would not have preferred a 
royal crown or a wreath of glory to that beautiful smooth hand whose fingers 
were twined in my hair. 

Then I answered her: “People will not believe our story because they do not 
know what love is the only flower that grows and blossoms without the aid of 
seasons, but was it Nisan that brought us together for the first time, and is it this 
hour that has arrested us in the Holy of Holies of life? Is it not the hand of God 
that brought our souls close together before birth and made us prisoners of each 
other for all the days and nights? Man’s life does not commence in the womb 
and never ends in the grave; and this firmament, full of moonlight and stars, is 
not deserted by loving souls and intuitive spirits.” 

As she drew her hand away from my head, I felt a kind of electrical vibration 
at the roots of my hair mingled with the night breeze. Like a devoted worshiper 
who receives his blessing by kissing the altar in a shrine, I took Selma’s hand, 
placed my burning lips on it, and gave it a long kiss, the memory of which melts 
my heart and awakens by its sweetness all the virtue of my spirit. 

An hour passed, every minute of which was a year of love. The silence of the 
night, moonlight, flowers, and trees made us forget all reality except love, when 
suddenly we heard the galloping of horses and rattling of carriage wheels. 
Awakened from our pleasant swoon and plunged from the world of dreams into 
the world of perplexity and misery, we found that the old man had retumed from 
his mission. We rose and walked through the orchard to meet him. 

Then the carriage reached the entrance of the garden, Farris Effandi 
dismounted and slowly walked towards us, bending forward slightly as if he 
were Catrying a heavy load. He approached Selma and placed both of his hands 


on her shoulders and stared at her. Tears coursed down his wrinkled cheeks and 
his lips trembled with sorrowful smile. In a choking voice, he said, “My beloved 
Selma, very soon you will be taken away from the arms of your father to the 
arms of another man. Very soon fate will carry you from this lonely home to the 
world’s spacious court, and this garden will miss the pressure of your footsteps, 
and your father will become a stranger to you. All is done; may God bless you.” 

Hearing these words, Selma’s face clouded and her eyes froze as if she felt a 
premonition of death. Then she screamed, like a bird shot down, suffering, and 
trembling, and in a choked voice said, “What do you say? What do you mean? 
Where are you sending me?” 

Then she looked at him searchingly, trying to discover his secret. In a moment 
she said, “I understand. I understand everything. The Bishop has demanded me 
from you and has prepared a cage for this bird with broken wings. Is this your 
will, Father?” 

His answer was a deep sigh. Tenderly he led Selma into the house while I 
remained standing in the garden, waves of perplexity beating upon me like a 
tempest upon autumn leaves. Then I followed them into the living room, and to 
avoid embarrassment, shook the old man’s hand, looked at Selma, my beautiful 
star, and left the house. 

As I reached the end of the garden I heard the old man calling me and turned 
to meet him. Apologetically he took my hand and said, “Forgive me, my son. I 
have ruined your evening with the shedding of tears, but please come to see me 
when my house is deserted and I am lonely and desperate. Youth, my dear son, 
does not combine with senility, as morning does not have meet the night; but you 
will come to me and call to my memory the youthful days which I spent with 
your father, and you will tell me the news of life which does not count me as 
among its sons any longer. Will you not visit me when Selma leaves and I am 
left here in loneliness?” 

While he said these sorrowful words and I silently shook his hand, I felt the 
warm tears falling from his eyes upon my hand. Trembling with sorrow and filial 
affection. I felt as if my heart were choked with grief. When I raised my head 
and he saw the tears in my eyes, he bent toward me and touched my forehead 
with his lips. “Good-bye, son, Good-bye.” 

In old man’s tear is more potent than that of a young man because it is the 
residuum of life in his weakening body. A young man’s tear is like a drop of dew 
on the leaf of a rose, while that of an old man is like a yellow leaf which falls 


with the wind at the approach of winter. 

As I left the house of Farris Effandi Karamy, Selma’s voice still rang in my 
ears, her beauty followed me like a wraith, and her father’s tears dried slowly on 
my hand. 

My departure was like Adam’s exodus from Paradise, but the Eve of my heart 
was not with me to make the whole world an Eden. That night, in which I had 
been born again, I felt that I saw death’s face for the first time. 

Thus the sun enlivens and kills the fields with its heat. 


Chapter Six 
The Lake of Fire 
(D> = = C) 


Everything that a man does secretly in the darkness of night will be clearly 
revealed in the daylight. Words uttered in privacy will become unexpectedly 
common conversation. Deed which we hide today in the corners of our lodgings 
will be shouted on every street tomorrow. 

Thus the ghosts of darkness revealed the purpose of Bishop Bulos Galib’s 
meeting with Farris Effandi Karamy, and his conversation was repeated all over 
the neighbourhood until it reached my ears. 

The discussion that took place between Bishop Bulos Galib and Farris Effandi 
that night was not over the problems of the poor or the widows and orphans. The 
main purpose for sending after Farris Effandi and bringing him in the Bishops’ 
private carriage was the betrothal of Selma to the Bishop’s nephew, Mansour 
Bey Galib. 

Selma was the only child of the wealthy Farris Effandi, and the Bishop’s 
choice fell on Selma, not on account of her beauty and noble spirit, but on 
account of her father’s money which would guarantee Mansour Bey a good and 
prosperous fortune and make him an important man. 

The heads of religion in the East are not satisfied with their own munificence, 
but they must strive to make all members of their families superiors and 
oppressors. The glory of a prince goes to his eldest son by inheritance, but the 
exaltation of a religious head is contagious among his brothers and nephews. 
Thus the Christian bishop and the Moslem imam and the Brahman priest become 
like sea reptiles who clutch their prey with many tentacles and suck their blood 
with numerous mouths. 

Then the Bishop demanded Selma’s hand for his nephew, the only answer that 
he received from her father was a deep silence and falling tears, for he hated to 
lose his only child. Any man’s soul trembles when he is separated from his only 


daughter whom he has reared to young womanhood. 

The sorrow of parents at the marriage of a daughter is equal to their happiness 
at the marriage of a son, because a son brings to the family a new member, while 
a daughter, upon her marriage, is lost to them. 

Farris Effandi perforce granted the Bishop’s request, obeying his will 
unwillingly, because Farris Effandi knew the Bishop’s nephew very well, knew 
that he was dangerous, full of hate, wickedness, and corruption. 

In Lebanon, no Christian could oppose his bishop and remain in good 
standing. No man could disobey his religious head and keep his reputation. The 
eye could not resist a spear without being pierced, and the hand could not grasp a 
sword without being cut off. 

Suppose that Farris Effandi had resisted the Bishop and refused his wish; then 
Selma’s reputation would have been ruined and her name would have been 
blemished by the dirt of lips and tongues. In the opinion of the fox, high bunches 
of grapes that can’t be reached are sour. 

Thus destiny seized Selma and led her like a humiliated slave in the procession 
of miserable oriental woman, and thus fell that noble spirit into the trap after 
having flown freely on the white wings of love in a sky full of moonlight scented 
with the odour of flowers. 

In some countries, the parent’s wealth is a source of misery for the children. 
The wide strong box which the father and mother together have used for the 
safety of their wealth becomes a narrow, dark prison for the souls of their heirs. 
The Almighty Dinar which the people worship becomes a demon which 
punished the spirit and deadens the heart. Selma Karamy was one of those who 
were the victims of their parents’ wealth and bridegrooms’ cupidity. Had it not 
been for her father’s wealth, Selma would still be living happily. 

A week had passed. The love of Selma was my sole entertainer, singing songs 
of happiness for me at night and waking me at dawn to reveal the meaning of life 
and the secrets of nature. It is a heavenly love that is free from jealousy, rich and 
never harmful to the spirit. It is deep affinity that bathes the soul in contentment; 
a deep hunger for affection which, when satisfied, fills the soul with bounty; a 
tenderness that creates hope without agitating the soul, changing earth to 
paradise and life to a sweet and a beautiful dream. In the morning, when I 
walked in the fields, I saw the token of Eternity in the awakening of nature, and 
when I sat by the seashore I heard the waves singing the song of Eternity. And 
when I walked in the streets I saw the beauty of life and the splendour of 


humanity in the appearance of passers-by and movements of workers. 

Those days passed like ghosts and disappeared like clouds, and soon nothing 
was left for me but sorrowful memories. The eye with which I used to look at the 
beauty of spring and the awakening of nature, could see nothing but the fury of 
the tempest and the misery of winter. The ears with which I formerly heard with 
delight the song of the waves, could hear only the howling of the wind and the 
wrath of the sea against the precipice. The soul which had observed happily the 
tireless vigour of mankind and the glory of the universe, was tortured by the 
knowledge of disappointment and failure. Nothing was more beautiful than those 
days of love, and nothing was more bitter than those horrible nights of sorrow. 

When I could no longer resist the impulse, I went, on the weekend, once more 
to Selma’s home—the shrine which Beauty had erected and which Love had 
blessed, in which the spirit could worship and the heart kneel humbly and pray. 
When I entered the garden I felt a power pulling me away from this world and 
placing me in a sphere supernaturally free from struggle and hardship. Like a 
mystic who receives a revelation of Heaven, I saw myself amid the trees and 
flowers, and as I approached the entrance of the house I beheld Selma sitting on 
the bench in the shadow of a jasmine tree where we both had sat the week 
before, on that night which Providence had chosen for the beginning of my 
happiness and sorrow. 

She neither moved nor spoke as I approached her. She seemed to have known 
intuitively that I was coming, and when I sat by her she gazed at me for a 
moment and sighed deeply, then turned her head and looked at the sky. And, 
after a moment full of magic silence, she turned back toward me and tremblingly 
took my hand and said in a faint voice, “Look at me, my friend; study my face 
and I read in it that which you want to know and which I cannot recite. Look at 
me, my beloved... look at me, my brother.” 

I gazed at her intently and saw that those eyes, which a few days ago were 
smiling like lips and moving like the wings of a nightingales, were already 
sunken and glazed with sorrow and pain. Her face, that had resembled the 
unfolding, sun kissed leaves of a lily, had faded and become colourless. Her 
sweet lips were like two withering roses that autumn has left on their stems. Her 
neck, that had been a column of ivory, was bent forward as if it no longer could 
support the burden of grief in her head. 

All these changes I saw in Selma’s face, but to me they were like a passing 
cloud that covered the face of the moon and makes it more beautiful. A look 


which reveals inward stress adds more beauty to the face, no matter how much 
tragedy and pain it bespeaks; but the face which, in silence, does not announce 
hidden mysteries is not beautiful, regardless of the symmetry of its features. The 
cup does not entice our lips unless the wine’s colour is seen through the 
transparent crystal. 

Selma, on that evening, was like a cup full of heavenly wine concocted of the 
bitterness and sweetness of life. Unaware, she symbolized the oriental woman 
who never leaves her parents’ home until she puts upon her neck the heavy yoke 
of her husband, who never leaves her loving mother’s arms until she must live as 
a slave, enduring the harshness of her husband’s mother. 

I continued to look at Selma and listen to her depressed spirit and suffer with 
her until I felt that time has ceased and the universe had faded from existence. I 
could see only her two large eyes staring fixedly at me and could feel only her 
cold, trembling hand holding mine. 

I woke from my swoon hearing Selma saying quietly, “Come by beloved, let 
us discuss the horrible future before it comes, My father has just left the house to 
see the man who is going to be my companion until death. My father, whom God 
chose for the purpose of my existence, will meet the man whom the world has 
selected to be my master for the rest of my life. In the heart of this city, the old 
man who accompanied me during my youth will meet the young man who will 
be my companion for the coming years. Tonight the two families will set the 
marriage date. What a strange and impressive hour! Last week at this time, under 
this jasmine tree, Love embraced my soul for the first time, okay. While Destiny 
was writing the first word of my life’s story at the Bishop’s mansion. Now, while 
my father and my suitor are planning the day of marriage, I see your spirit 
quivering around me as a thirsty bird flickers above a spring of water guarded by 
a hungry serpent. Oh, how great this night is! And how deep is its mystery!” 

Learning these words, I felt that dark ghost of complete despondency was 
seizing our love to choke it in its infancy, and I answered her, “That bird will 
remain flickering over that spring until thirst destroys him or falls into the grasp 
of a serpent and becomes its prey.” 

She responded, “No, my beloved, this nightingale should remain alive and 
sing until dark comes, until spring passes, until the end of the world, and keep on 
singing eternally. His voice should not be silenced, because he brings life to my 
heart, his wings should not be broken, because their motion removes the cloud 
from my heart. 


When I whispered, “Selma, my beloved, thirst will exhaust him, and fear will 
kill him.” 

She replied immediately with trembling lips, “The thirst of soul is sweeter than 
the wine of material things, and the fear of spirit is dearer than the security of the 
body. But listen, my beloved, listen carefully, I am standing today at the door of 
a new life which I know nothing about. I am like a blind man who feels his way 
so that he will not fall. My father’s wealth has placed me in the slave market, 
and this man has bought me. I neither know nor love him, but I shall learn to 
love him, and I shall obey him, serve him, and make him happy. I shall give him 
all that a weak woman can give a strong man. 

But you, my beloved, are still in the prime of life. You can walk freely upon 
life’s spacious path, carpeted with flowers. You are free to traverse the world, 
making of your heart a torch to light your way. You can think, talk, and act 
freely; you can write your name on the face of life because you are a man; you 
can live as a master because your father’s wealth will not place you in the slave 
market to be bought and sold; you can marry the woman of your choice and, 
before she lives in your home, you can let her reside in your heart and can 
exchange confidences without hindrances.” 

Silence prevailed for a moment, and Selma continued, “But, is it now that Life 
will tear us apart so that you may attain the glory of a man and I the duty of a 
woman? Is it for this that the valley swallows the song of the nightingale in its 
depths, and the wind scatters the petals of the rose, and the feet tread upon the 
wind cup? Were all those nights we spent in the moonlight by the jasmine tree, 
where our souls united, in vain? Did we fly swiftly toward the stars until our 
wings tired, and are we descending now into the abyss? Or was Love asleep 
when he came to us, and did he, when he woke, become angry and decide to 
punish us? Or did our spirits turn the nights’ breeze into a wind that tore us to 
pieces and blew us like dust to the depth of the valley? We disobeyed no 
commandment, nor did we taste of forbidden fruit, so what is making us leave 
this paradise? We never conspired or practised mutiny, then why are we 
descending to hell? No, no, the moments which united us are greater than 
centuries, and the light that illuminated our spirits is stronger than the dark; and 
if the tempest separates us on this rough ocean, the waves will unite us on the 
calm shore; and if this life kills us, death will unite us. A woman’s heart will 
change with time or season; even if it dies eternally, it will never perish. A 
woman’s heart is like a field tured into a battleground; after the trees are 
uprooted and the grass is burned and the rocks are reddened with blood and the 


earth is planted with bones and skulls, it is calm and silent as if nothing has 
happened; for the spring and autumn come at their intervals and resume their 
work. 

And now, my beloved, what shall we do? How shall we part and when shall 
we meet? Shall we consider love a strange visitor who came in the evening and 
left us in the morning? Or shall we suppose this affection a dream that came in 
our sleep and departed when we awoke? 

Shall we consider this week an hour of intoxication to be replaced by 
soberness? Raise your head and let me look at you, my beloved; open your lips 
and let me hear your voice. Speak to me! Will you remember me after this 
tempest has sunk the ship of our love? Will you hear the whispering of my wings 
in the silence of the night? Will you hear my spirit fluttering over you? Will you 
listen to my sighs? Will you see my shadow approach with the shadows of dusk 
and disappear with the flush of dawn? Tell me, my beloved, what will you be 
after having been magic ray to my eyes, sweet song to my ears, and wings to my 
soul? What will you be?” 

Learming these words, my heart melted, and I answered her, “I will be as you 
want me to be, my beloved.” 

Then she said, “I want you to love me as a poet loves his sorrowful thoughts. I 
want you to remember me as a traveller remembers a calm pool in which his 
image was reflected as he drank its water. I want you to remember me as a 
mother remember her child that died before it saw the light, and I want you to 
remember me as a merciful king remembers a prisoner who died before his 
pardon reached him. I want you to be my companion, and I want you to visit my 
father and console him in his solitude because I shall be leaving him soon and 
shall be a stranger to him. 

I answered her, saying, “I will do all you have said and will make my soul an 
envelope for your soul, and my heart a residence for your beauty and my breast a 
grave for your sorrows. I shall love you, Selma, as the prairies love the spring, 
and I shall live in you in the life of a flower under the sun’s rays. I shall sing 
your name as the valley sings the echo of the bells of the village churches; I shall 
listen to the language of your soul as the shore listens to the story of the waves. I 
shall remember you as a stranger remembers his beloved country, and as a 
hungry man remembers a banquet, and as a dethroned king remembers the days 
of his glory, and as a prisoner remembers the hours of ease and freedom. I shall 
remember you as a sower remembers the bundles of wheat on his threshing flour, 


and as a shepherd remembers the green prairies the sweet brooks.” 

Selma listened to my words with palpitating heart, and said “Tomorrow the 
truth will become ghostly and the awakening will be like a dream. Will a lover 
be satisfied embracing a ghost, or will a thirsty man quench his thirst from the 
spring or a dream?” 

I answered her, “Tomorrow, destiny will put you in the midst of a peaceful 
family, but it will send me into the world of struggle and warfare. You will be in 
the home of a person whom chance has made most fortunate through your 
beauty and virtue, while I shall be living a life of suffering and fear. You will 
enter the gate of life, while I shall enter the gate of death. You will be received 
hospitably, while I shall exist in solitude, but I shall erect a statue of love and 
worship it in the valley of death. Love will be my sole comforter, and I shall 
drink love like wine and wear it like garment. At dawn, Love will wake me from 
slumber and take me to the distant field, and at noon will lead me to the shadows 
of trees, where I will find shelter with the birds from the heat of the sun. In the 
evening, it will cause me to pause before sunset to hear nature’s farewell song to 
the light of day and will show me ghostly clouds sailing in the sky. At night, 
Love will embrace me, and I shall sleep, dreaming of the heavenly world where 
the spirits of lovers and poets abide. In the Spring I shall walk side by side with 
love among violets and jasmines and drink the remaining drops of winter in the 
lily cups. In Summer we shall make the bundles of hay our pillows and the grass 
our bed, and the blue sky will cover us as we gaze at the stars and the moon. 

In Autumn, Love and I will go to the vineyard and sit by the wine press and 
watch the grapevines being denuded of their golden ornaments, and the 
migrating flocks of birds will wing over us. In Winter, we shall sit by the fireside 
reciting stories of long ago and chronicles of far countries. During my youth, 
Love will be my teacher; in middle age, my help; and in old age, my delight. 
Love, my beloved Selma, will stay with me to the end of my life, and after death 
the hand of God will unite us again.” 

All these words came from the depths of my heart like flames of fire which 
leap raging from the hearth and then disappear in the ashes. Selma was weeping 
as if her eyes were lips answering me with tears. 

Those whom love has not given wings cannot fly the cloud of appearances to 
see the magic world in which Selma’s spirit and mine existed together in that 
sorrowfully happy hour. Those whom Love has not chosen as followers do not 
hear when Love calls. This story is not for them. Even if they should 


comprehend these pages, they would not be able to grasp the shadowy meanings 
which are not clothed in words and do not reside on paper, but what human 
being is he who has never sipped the wine from the cup of love, and what spirit 
is it that has never stood reverently before that lighted altar in the temple whose 
pavement is the hearts of men and women and whose ceiling is the secret canopy 
of dreams? What flower is that on whose leaves the dawn has never poured a 
drop of dew; what streamlet is that which lost its course without going to the 
sea? 

Selma raised her face toward the sky and gazed at the heavenly stars which 
studded the firmament. She stretched out her hands; her eyes widened, and her 
lips trembled. On her pale face, I could see the signs of sorrow, oppression, 
hopelessness, and pain. Then she cried, “Oh, Lord, what has a woman done that 
hath offended Thee? What sin has she committed to deserve such a punishment? 
For what crime has she been awarded everlasting castigation? Oh, Lord, Thou 
art strong, and I am weak. Why hast Thou made me suffer pain? Thou art great 
and almighty, while I am nothing but a tiny creature crawling before Thy throne. 
Why hast Thou crushed me with Thy foot? Thou art a raging tempest, and I am 
like dust; why, my Lord, hast Thou flung me upon the cold earth? Thou art 
powerful, and I am helpless; why art Thou fighting me? Thou art considerate, 
and I am prudent; why art Thou destroying me? Thou hast created woman with 
love, and why, with love, dost Thou ruin her? With Thy right hand dost Thou lift 
her, and with Thy left hand dost Thou strike her into the abyss, and she knows 
not why. In her mouth Thou blowest the breath of Life, and in her heart Thou 
sowest the seeds of death. Thou dost show her the path of happiness, but Thou 
leadest her in the road of misery; in her mouth Thou dost place a song of 
happiness, but then Thou dost close her lips with sorrow and dost fetter her 
tongue with agony. With Thy mysterious fingers dost Thou dress her wounds, 
and with Thine hands Thou drawest the dread of pain round her pleasures. In her 
bed Thou hidest pleasure and peace, but beside it Thou dost erect obstacles and 
fear. Thou dost excite her affection through Thy will, and from her affection 
does shame emanate. By Thy will Thou showest her the beauty of creation, but 
her love for beauty becomes a terrible famine. Thou dost make her drink life in 
the cup of death, and death in the cup of life. Thou purifiest her with tears, and in 
tears her life streams away. Oh, Lord, Thou hast opened my eyes with love, and 
with love Thou hast blinded me. Thou hast kissed me with Thy lips and struck 
me with Thy strong hand. Thou has planted in my heart a white rose, but around 
the rose a barrier of thorns. Thou hast tied my present with the spirit of a young 


man whom I love, but my life with the body of an unknown man. So help me, 
my Lord, to be strong in this deadly struggle and assist me to be truthful and 
virtuous until death. Thy will be done. Oh, Lord God.” 

Silence continued. Selma looked down, pale and frail; her arms dropped, and 
her head bowed and it seemed to me as if a tempest had broken a branch from a 
tree and cast it down to dry and perish. 

I took her cold hand and kissed it, but when I attempted to console her it was I 
who needed consolation more than she did. I kept silent, thinking of our plight 
and listening to my heartbeats. Neither of us said more. 

Extreme torture is mute, and so we sat silent, petrified, like columns of marble 
buried under the sand of an earthquake. Neither wished to listen to the other 
because our heart-threads had become weak and even breathing would have 
broken them. 

It was midnight, and we could see the crescent moon rising from behind 
Mount Sunnin, and it looked in the midst of the stars, like the face of a corpse, in 
a coffin surrounded by the dim lights of candles. And Lebanon looked like an 
old man whose back was bent with age and whose eyes were a haven for 
insomnia, watching the dark and waiting for dawn, like asking sitting on the 
ashes of his throne in the debris of his palace. 

The mountains, trees, and rivers change their appearance with the vicissitudes 
of times and seasons, as a man changes with his experiences and emotions. The 
lofty poplar that resembles a bride in the daytime, will look like a column of 
smoke in the evening; the huge rock that stands impregnable at noon, will appear 
to be a miserable pauper at night, with earth for his bed and the sky for his cover; 
and the rivulet that we see glittering in the morning and hear singing the hymn of 
Eternity, will, in the evening, turn to a stream of tears wailing like a mother 
bereft of her child, and Lebanon, that had looked dignified a week before, when 
the moon was full and our spirits were happy, looked sorrowful and lonesome 
that night. 

We stood up and bade each other farewell, but love and despair stood between 
us like two ghosts, one stretching his wings with his fingers over our throats, one 
weeping and the other laughing hideously. 

As I took Selma’s hand and put it to my lips, she came close to me and placed 
a kiss on my forehead, then dropped on the wooden bench. She shut her eyes and 
whispered softly, “Oh, Lord God, have mercy on me and mend my broken 
wings!” 


As I left Selma in the garden, I felt as if my senses were covered with a thick 
veil, like a lake whose surface is concealed by fog. 

The beauty of trees, the moonlight, the deep silence, everything about me 
looked ugly and horrible. The true light that had showed me the beauty and 
wonder of the universe was converted to a great flame of fire that seared my 
heart; and the Eternal music I used to hear became a clamour, more frightening 
than the roar of a lion. 

I reached my room, and like a wounded bird shot down by a hunter, I fell on 
my bed, repeating the words of Selma: “Oh, Lord God, have mercy on me and 
mend my broken wings!” 


Chapter Seven 
Before the Throne of Death 
2 = = C) 


Marriage in these days is a mockery whose management is in the hands of young 
men and parents. In most countries the young men win while the parents lose. 
The woman is looked upon as a commodity, purchased and delivered from one 
house to another. In time her beauty fades and she becomes like an old piece of 
furniture left in a dark corner. 

Modern civilization has made woman a little wiser, but it has increased her 
suffering because of man’s covetousness. The woman of yesterday was a happy 
wife, but the woman of today is a miserable mistress. In the past she walked 
blindly in the light, but now she walks open-eyed in the dark. She was beautiful 
in her ignorance, virtuous in her simplicity, and strong in her weakness. Today 
she has become ugly in her ingenuity, superficial and heartless in her knowledge. 
Will the day ever come when beauty and knowledge, ingenuity and virtue, and 
weakness of body and strength of spirit will be united in a woman? 

I am one of those who believe that spiritual progress is a rule of human life, 
but the approach to perfection is slow and painful. If a woman elevates herself in 
one respect and is retarded in another, it is because the rough trail that leads to 
the mountain peak is not free of ambushes of thieves and lairs of wolves. 

This strange generation exists between sleeping and waking. It holds in its 
hands the soil of the past and the seeds of the future. However, we find in every 
city a woman who symbolizes the future. 

In the city of Beirut, Selma Karamy was the symbol of the future Oriental 
woman, but, like many who lie ahead of their time, she became the victim of the 
present; and like a flower snatched from its stem and carried away by the current 
of a river, she walked in the miserable procession of the defeated. 

Mansour Bey Galib and Selma were married, and lived together in a beautiful 
house at Ras Beyrouth, where all the wealthy dignitaries resided. Farris Effandi 


Karamy was left in his solitary home in the midst of his garden and orchards like 
a lonely shepherd amid his flock. 

The days and merry nights of the wedding passed, but the honeymoon left 
memories of times of bitter sorrow, as wars leave skulls and dead bones on the 
battlefield. The dignity of an Oriental wedding inspires the hearts of young men 
and women, but its termination may drop them like millstones to the bottom of 
the sea. Their exhilaration is like footprints on sand which remain only till they 
are washed away by the waves. 

Spring departed, and so did summer and autumn, but my love for Selma 
increased day by day until it became a kind of mute worship, the feeling that an 
orphan has toward the soul of his mother in Heaven. My yearning was converted 
to blind sorrow that could see nothing but itself, and the passion that drew tears 
from my eyes was replaced by perplexity that sucked the blood from my heart, 
and my sighs of affection became a constant prayer for the happiness of Selma 
and her husband and peace for her father. 

My hopes and prayers were in vain, because Selma’s misery was an internal 
malady that nothing but death could cure. 

Mansour Bey was a man to whom all the luxuries of life came easily; but, in 
spite of that, he was dissatisfied and rapacious. After marrying Selma, he 
neglected her father in his loneliness and prayed for his death so that he could 
inherit what was left of the old man’s wealth. 

Mansour Bey’s character was similar to his uncle’s; the only difference 
between the two was that the Bishop got everything he wanted secretly, under 
the protection of his ecclesiastical robe and the golden cross which he wore on 
his chest, while his nephew did everything publicly. The Bishop went to church 
in the morning and spent the rest of the day pilfering from the widows, orphans, 
and simple minded people. But Mansour Bey spent his days in pursuit of sexual 
satisfaction. On Sunday, Bishop Bulos Galib preached his Gospel; but during 
weekdays he never practiced what he preached, occupying himself with political 
intrigues of the locality. And, by means of his uncle’s prestige and influence, 
Mansour Bey made it his business to secure political plums for those who could 
offer a sufficient bribe. 

Bishop Bulos was a thief who hid himself under the cover of night, while his 
nephew, Mansour Bey, was a swindler who walked proudly in daylight. 
However, the people of Oriental nations place trust in such as they—wolves and 
butchers who ruin their country through covetousness and crush their neighbours 


with an iron hand. 

Why do I occupy these pages with words about the betrayers of poor nations 
instead of reserving all the space for the story of a miserable woman with a 
broken heart? Why do I shed tears for oppressed peoples rather than keep all my 
tears for the memory of a weak woman whose life was snatched by the teeth of 
death? 

But my dear readers, don’t’ you think that such a woman is like a nation that is 
oppressed by priests and rulers? Don’t you believe that thwarted love which 
leads a woman to the grave is like the despair which pervades the people of the 
earth? A woman is to a nation as light is to a lamp. Will not the light be dim if 
the oil in the lamp is low? 

Autumn passed, and the wind blew the yellow leaves form the trees, making 
way for winter, which came howling and crying. I was still in the City of Beirut 
without a companion save my dreams, which would lift my spirit to the sky and 
then bury it deep in the bosom of the earth. 

The sorrowful spirit finds relaxation in solitude. It abhors people, as a 
wounded deer deserts the herd and lives in a cave until it is healed or dead. 

One day I heard Farris Effandi was ill. I left my solitary abode and walked to 
his home, taking a new route, a lonely path between olive trees, avoiding the 
main road with its rattling carriage wheels. 

Arriving at the old man’s house, I entered and found Farris Effandi lying on 
his bed, weak and pale. His eyes were sunken and looked like two deep, dark 
valleys haunted by the ghosts of pain. The smile which had always enlivened his 
face was choked with pain and agony; and the bones of his gentle hands looked 
like naked branches trembling before the tempest. As I approached him and 
inquired as to his health, he turned his pale face toward me, and on his trembling 
lips appeared a smile, and he said in a weak voice, “Go—go, my son, to the 
other room and comfort Selma and bring her to sit by the side of my bed.” 

I entered the adjacent room and found Selma lying on a divan, covering her 
head with her arms and burying her face in a pillow so that her father would not 
hear her weeping. Approaching slowly, I pronounced her name in a voice that 
seemed more like sighing than whispering. She moved fearfully, as if she had 
been interrupted in a terrible dream, and sat up, looking at me with glazed eyes, 
doubting whether I was a ghost or a living being. After a deep silence which 
took us back on the wings of memory to that hour when we were intoxicated 
with wine of love, Selma wiped away her tears and said, “See how time has 


changed us! See how time has changed the course of our lives and left us in 
these ruins. In this place spring united us in a bond of love, and in this place has 
brought us together before the throne of death. How beautiful was spring, and 
how terrible is this winter!” 

Speaking thus, she covered her face again with her hands as if she were 
shielding her eyes from the spectre of the past standing before her. I put my hand 
on her head and said, “Come, Selma, come and let us be as strong towers before 
the tempest. Let us stand like brave soldiers before the enemy and face his 
weapons. If we are killed, we shall die as martyrs; and if we win, we shall live as 
heroes. Braving obstacles and hardships is nobler than retreat to tranquillity. The 
butterfly that hovers around the lamp until it dies is more admirable than the 
mole that lives in a dark tunnel. Come, Selma, let us walk this rough path firmly, 
with our eyes toward the sun so that we may not see the skulls and serpents 
among the rocks and thorns. if fear should stop us in middle of the road, we 
would hear only ridicule from the voices of the night, but if we reach the 
mountain peak bravely we shall join the heavenly spirits in songs of triumph and 
joy. Cheer up, Selma, wipe away your tears and remove the sorrow from your 
face. Rise, and let us sit by the bed of your father, because his life depends on 
your life, and your smile is his only cure.” 

Kindly and affectionately she looked at me and said, “Are you asking me to 
have patience, while you are in need of it yourself? Will a hungry man give his 
bread to another hungry man? Or will sick man give medicine to another which 
he himself needs badly?” 

She rose, her head bent slightly forward and we walked to the old man’s room 
and sat by the side of his bed. Selma forced a smile and pretended to be patient, 
and her father tried to make her believe that he was feeling better and getting 
stronger; but both father and daughter were aware of each other’s sorrow and 
heard the unvoiced sighs. They were like two equal forces, wearing each other 
away silently. The father’s heart was melting because of his daughter’s plight. 
They were two pure souls, one departing and the other agonized with grief, 
embracing in love and death; and I was between the two with my own troubled 
heart. We were three people, gathered and crushed by the hands of destiny; an 
old man like a dwelling ruined by flood, a young woman whose symbol was a 
lily beheaded by the sharp edge of a sickle, and a young man who was a weak 
sapling, bent by a snowfall; and all of us were toys in the hands of fate. 

Farris Effandi moved slowly and stretched his weak hand toward Selma, and 
in a loving and tender voice said, “Hold my hand, my beloved.” Selma held his 


hand; then he said, “I have lived long enough, and I have enjoyed the fruits of 
life’s seasons. I have experienced all its phases with equanimity. I lost your 
mother when you were three years of age, and she left you as a precious treasure 
in my lap. I watched you grow, and your face reproduced your mother’s features 
as stars reflected in a calm pool of water. Your character, intelligence, and beauty 
are your mother’s, even your manner of speaking and gestures. You have been 
my only consolation in this life because you were the image of your mother in 
every deed and word. Now, I grow old, and my only resting place is between the 
soft wings of death. Be comforted, my beloved daughter, because I have lived 
long enough to see you as a woman. Be happy because I shall live in you after 
my death. My departure today would be no different from my going tomorrow or 
the day after, for our days are perishing like the leaves of autumn. The hour of 
my days are perishing like the leaves of autumn. The hour of my death 
approaches rapidly, and my soul is desirous of being united with your 
mother’s.” 

As he uttered these words sweetly and lovingly, his face was radiant. Then he 
put his hand under his pillow and pulled out a small picture in a gold frame. 
With his eyes on the little photograph, he said, “Come, Selma, come and see 
your mother in this picture.” 

Selma wiped away her tears, and after gazing long at the picture, she kissed it 
repeatedly and cried, “Oh, my beloved mother! Oh, mother!” Then she placed 
her trembling lips on the picture as if she wished to pour her soul into that 
image. 

The most beautiful word on the lips of mankind is the word “Mother,” and the 
most beautiful call is the call of “My mother.” it is a word full of hope and love, 
a sweet and kind word coming from the depths of the heart. The mother is 
everything—she is our consolation in sorrow, our hope in misery, and our 
strength in weakness. She is the source of love, mercy, sympathy, and 
forgiveness. He who loses his mother loses a pure soul who blesses and guards 
him constantly. 

Everything in nature bespeaks the mother. The sun is the mother of earth and 
gives it its nourishment of hear; it never leaves the universe at night until it has 
put the earth to sleep to the song of the sea and the hymn of birds and brooks. 
And this earth is the mother of trees and flowers. It produces them, nurses them, 
and weans them. The trees and flowers become kind mothers of their great fruits 
and seeds. And the mother, the prototype of all existence, is the eternal spirit, full 
of beauty and love. 


Selma Karamy never knew her mother because she had died when Selma was 
an infant, but Selma wept when she saw the picture and cried, “Oh, mother!” 
The word mother is hidden in our hearts, and it comes upon our lips in hours of 
sorrow and happiness as the perfume comes from the heart of the rose and 
mingles with clear and cloudy air. 

Selma stared at her mother’s picture, kissing it repeatedly, until she collapsed 
by her father’s bed. 

The old man placed both hands on her head and said, “I have shown you, my 
dear child, a picture of your mother on paper. Now listen to me and I shall let 
you hear her words.” 

She lifted her head like a little bird in the nest that hears its mother’s wing, and 
looked at him attentively. 

Farris Effandi opened his mouth and said, “Your mother was nursing you when 
she lost her father; she cried and wept at his going, but she was wise and patient. 
She sat by me in this room as soon as the funeral was over and held my hand and 
said, ‘Farris, my father is dead now and you are my only consolation in this 
world. The heart’s affections are divided like the branches of the cedar tree; if 
the tree loses one strong branch, it will suffer but it does not die. It will pour all 
its vitality into the next branch so that it will grow and fill the empty place.’ This 
is what your mother told me when her father died, and you should say the same 
thing when death takes my body to its resting place and my soul to God’s care.’ 

Selma answered him with falling tears and broken heart, “When Mother lost 
her father, you took his place; but who is going to take yours when you are 
gone? She was left in the care of a loving and truthful husband; she found 
consolation in her little daughter, and who will be my consolation when you pass 
away? You have been my father and mother and the companion of my youth.” 

Saying these words, she turned and looked at me, and, holding the side of my 
garment, said, “This is the only friend I shall have after you are gone, but how 
can he console me when he is suffering also? How can a broken heart find 
consolation in a disappointed soul? A sorrowful woman cannot be comforted by 
her neighbour’s sorrow, nor can a bird fly with broken wings. He is the friend of 
my soul, but I have already placed a heavy burden of sorrow upon him and 
dimmed his eyes with my tears till he can see nothing but darkness. He is a 
brother whom I dearly love, but he is like all brothers who share my sorrow and 
help me shed tears which increase my bitterness and burn my heart.” 

Selma’s words stabbed my heart, and I felt that I could bear no more. The old 


man listened to her with depressed spirit. The old man listened to her with 
depressed spirit, trembling like the light of a lamp before the wind. Then he 
stretched out his hand and said, “Let me go peacefully, my child. I have broken 
the bars of this cage; let me fly and do not stop me, for your mother is calling 
me. The sky is clear and the sea is calm and the boat is ready to sail; do not delay 
its voyage. Let my body rest with those who are resting; let my dream end and 
my soul awaken with the dawn; let your soul embrace mine and give me the kiss 
of hope; let no drops of sorrow or bitterness fall upon my body lest the flowers 
and grass refuse their nourishment. Do not shed tears of misery upon my hand, 
for they may grow thorns upon my grave. Do not draw lines of agony upon my 
forehead, for the wind may pass and read them and refuse to carry the dust of my 
bones to the green prairies... I love you, my child, while I lived, and I shall love 
you when I am dead, and my soul shall always watch over you and protect you.” 

When Farris Effandi looked at me with his eyes half closed and said, “My son, 
be a real brother to Selma as your father was to me. Be her help and friend in 
need, and do not let her mourn, because mourning for the dead is a mistake. 
Repeat to her pleasant tales and sing for her the songs of life so that she may 
forget her sorrows. Remember me to your father; ask him to tell you the stories 
of your youth and tell him that I loved him in the person of his son in the last 
hour of my life.” 

Silence prevailed, and I could see the pallor of death on the old man’s face. 
Then he rolled his eyes and looked at us and whispered, “Don’t call the 
physician, for he might extend my sentence in this prison by his medicine. The 
days of slavery are gone, and my soul seeks the freedom of the skies. And do not 
call the priest to my bedside, because his incantations would not save me if I 
were a Sinner, nor would it rush me to Heaven if I were innocent. The will of 
humanity cannot change the will of God, as an astrologer cannot change the 
course of the stars. But after my death let the doctors and priest do what they 
please, for my ship will continue sailing until it reaches its destination.” 

At midnight Farris Effandi opened his tired eyes for the last time and focused 
them on Selma, who was kneeling by his bedside. He tried to speak, but could 
not, for death had already choked his voice; but he finally managed to say, “The 
night has passed... Oh, Selma...Oh...Oh, Selma...” Then he bent his head, his 
face tured white, and I could see a smile on his lips as he breathed his last. 

Selma felt her father’s hand. It was cold. Then she raised her head and looked 
at his face. It was covered with the veil of death. Selma was so choked that she 
could not shed tears, nor sigh, nor even move. For a moment she stared at him 


with fixed eyes like those of a statue; then she bent down until her forehead 
touched the floor, and said, “Oh, Lord, have mercy and mend our broken 
wings.” 

Farris Effandi Karamy died; his soul was embraced by Eternity, and his body 
was returned to the earth. Mansour Bey Galib got possession of his wealth, and 
Selma became a prisoner of life—a life of grief and misery. 

I was lost in sorrow and reverie. Days and nights preyed upon me as the eagle 
ravages its victim. Many a time I tried to forget my misfortune by occupying 
myself with books and scriptures of past generation, but it was like extinguishing 
fire with oil, for I could see nothing in the procession of the past but tragedy and 
could hear nothing but weeping and wailing. The Book of Job was more 
fascinating to me than the Psalms and I preferred the Elegies of Jeremiah to the 
Song of Solomon. Hamlet was closer to my heart than all other dramas of 
western writers. Thus despair weakens our sight and closes our ears. We can see 
nothing but spectres of doom and can hear only the beating of our agitated 
hearts. 


Chapter Eight 
Between Christ and Ishtar 
2 = = C) 


In the midst of the gardens and hills which connect the city of Beirut with 
Lebanon there is a small temple, very ancient, dug out of white rock, surrounded 
by olive, almond, and willow trees. Although this temple is a half mile from the 
main highway, at the time of my story very few people interested in relics and 
ancient ruins had visited it. It was one of many interesting places hidden and 
forgotten in Lebanon. Due to its seclusion, it had become a haven for 
worshippers and a shrine for lonely lovers. 

As one enters this temple he sees on the wall at the east side an old Phoenician 
picture, carved in the rock depicting Ishtar, goddess of love and beauty, sitting on 
her throne, surrounded by seven nude virgins standing in different posses. The 
first one carries a torch; the second, a guitar; the third, a censer; the fourth a jug 
of wine; the fifth, a branch of roses; the sixth, a wreath of laurel; the seventh, a 
bow and arrow; and all of them look at Ishtar reverently. 

In the second wall there is another picture, more modern than the first one, 
symbolizing Christ nailed to the cross, and at His side stand His sorrowful 
mother and Mary Magdalene and two other women weeping. This Byzantine 
picture shows that it was carved in the fifteenth or sixteenth century. 

In the west side wall there are two round transits through which the sun’s rays 
enter the temple and strike the pictures and make them look as if they were 
painted with gold water colour. In the middle of the temple there is a square 
marble with old paintings on its sides, some of which can hardly be seen under 
the petrified lumps of blood which show that the ancient people offered 
sacrifices on this rock and poured perfume, wine, and oil upon it. 

There is nothing else in that little temple except deep silence, revealing to the 
living the secrets of the goddess and speaking wordlessly of past generations and 
the evolution of religions. Such a sight carries the poet to a world far away from 


the one in which he dwells and convinces the philosopher that men were born 
religious; they felt a need for that which they could not see and drew symbols, 
the meaning of which divulged their hidden secrets and their desires in life and 
death. 

In that unknown temple, I met Selma once every month and spent the hours 
with her, looking at those strange pictures, thinking of the crucified Christ and 
pondering upon the young Phoenician men and women who lived, loved and 
worshipped beauty in the person of Ishtar by burning incense before her statue 
and pouring perfume on her shrine, people for whom nothing is left to speak 
except the name, repeated by the march of time before the face of Eternity. 

It is hard to write down in words the memories of those hours when I met 
Selma—those heavenly hours, filled with pain, happiness, sorrow, hope, and 
misery. 

We met secretly in the old temple, remembering the old days, discussing our 
present, fearing our future, and gradually bringing out the hidden secrets in the 
depths of our hearts and complaining to each other of our misery and suffering, 
trying to console ourselves with imaginary hopes and sorrowful dreams. Every 
now and then we would become calm and wipe our tears and start smiling, 
forgetting everything except Love; we embraced each other until our hearts 
melted; then Selma would print a pure kiss on my forehead and fill my heart 
with ecstasy; I would return the kiss as she bent her ivory neck while her cheeks 
became gently red like the first ray of dawn on the forehead of hills. We silently 
looked at the distant horizon where the clouds were coloured with the orange ray 
of sunset. 

Our conversation was not limited to love; every now and then we drifted on to 
current topics and exchanged ideas. During the course of conversation Selma 
spoke of woman’s place in society, the imprint that the past generation had left 
on her character, the relationship between husband and wife, and the spiritual 
diseases and corruption which threatened married life. I remember her saying: 
“The poets and writers are trying to understand the reality of woman, but up to 
this day they have not understood the hidden secrets of her heart, because they 
look upon her from behind the sexual veil and see nothing but externals; they 
look upon her through the magnifying glass of hatefulness and find nothing 
except weakness and submission. 

In another occasion she said, pointing to the carved pictures on the walls of the 
temple, “In the heart of this rock there are two symbols depicting the essence of 


a woman’s desires and revealing the hidden secrets of her soul, moving between 
love and sorrow—between affection and sacrifice, between Ishtar sitting on the 
throne and Mary standing by the cross. The man buys glory and reputation, but 
the woman pays the price.” 

No one knew about our secret meetings except God and the flock of birds 
which flew over the temple. Selma used to come in her carriage to a place named 
Pasha park and from there she walked to the temple, where she found me 
anxiously waiting for her. 

We feared not the observer’s eyes, neither did our consciences bother us; the 
spirit which is purified by fire and washed by tears is higher than what the 
people call shame and disgrace; it is free from the laws of slavery and old 
customs against the affections of the human heart. That spirit can proudly stand 
unashamed before the throne of God. 

Human society has yielded for seventy centuries to corrupted laws until it 
cannot understand the meaning of the superior and eternal laws. A man’s eyes 
have become accustomed to the dim light of candles and cannot see the sunlight. 
Spiritual disease is inherited from one generation to another until it has become a 
part of people, who look upon it, not as a disease, but as a natural gift, showered 
by God upon Adam. If those people found someone free from the germs of this 
disease, they would think of him with shame and disgrace. 

Those who think evil of Selma Karamy because she left her husband’s home 
and met me in the temple are the diseased and weak-minded kind who look upon 
the healthy and sound as rebels. They are like insects crawling in the dark for 
fear of being stepped upon by the passer-by. 

The oppressed prisoners, who can break away from his jail and does not do so, 
is a coward. Selma, an innocent and oppressed prisoner, was unable to free 
herself from slavery. Was she to blame because she looked through the jail 
window upon the green fields and spacious sky? Will the people count her as 
being untruthful to her husband because she came from his home to sit by me 
between Christ and Ishtar? Let the people say what they please; Selma had 
passed the marshes which submerge other spirits and had landed in a world that 
could not be reached by the howling of wolves and rattling of snakes. People 
may say what they want about me, for the spirit who has seen the spectre of 
death cannot be scared by the faces of thieves; the soldier who has seen the 
swords glittering over his head and streams of blood under his feet does not care 
about rocks thrown at him by the children on the streets. 


Chapter Nine 
The Sacrifice 
(2 = = C) 


One day in the late part of June, as the people left the city for the mountain to 
avoid the heat of summer, I went as usual to the temple to meet Selma, carrying 
with me a little book of Andalusian poems. As I reached the temple I sat there 
waiting for Selma, glancing at intervals at the pages of my book, reciting those 
verses which filled my heart with ecstasy and brought to my soul the memory of 
the kings, poets, and knights who bade farewell to Granada, and left, with tears 
in their eyes and sorrow in their hearts, their palaces, institutions and hopes 
behind. In an hour I saw Selma walking in the midst of the gardens and I 
approaching the temple, leaning on her parasol as if she were carrying all the 
worries of the world upon her shoulders. As she entered the temple and sat by 
me, I noticed some sort of change in her eyes and I was anxious to inquire about 
it. 

Selma felt what was going on in my mind, and she put her hand on my head 
and said, “Come close to me, come my beloved, come and let me quench my 
thirst, for the hour of separation has come.” 

I asked her, “Did your husband find out about our meeting her?” She 
responded, “My husband does not care about me, neither does he know how I 
spend my time, for he is busy with those poor girls whom poverty has driven 
into the houses of ill fame; those girls who sell their bodies for bread, kneaded 
with blood and tears.” 

I inquired, “What prevents you from coming to this temple and sitting by me 
reverently before God? Is your soul requesting our separation.?” 

She answered with tears in her eyes, “No, my beloved, my spirit did not ask 
for separation, for you are a part of me. My eyes never get tired of looking at 
you, for you are their light; but if destiny ruled that I should walk the rough path 
of life loaded with shackles, would I be satisfied if your fate should be like 


mine?” Then she added, “I cannot say everything, because the tongue is mute 
with pain and cannot talk; the lips are sealed with misery and cannot move; all I 
can say to you is that I am afraid you may fall in the same trap I fell in.” 

When I asked, “What do you mean, Selma, and of whom are you afraid?” She 
covered her face with her hands and said, “The Bishop has already found out 
that once a month I have been leaving the grave which he buried me in.” 

I inquired, “Did the Bishop find out about our meetings here?” She answered, 
“Tf he did, you would not see me here sitting by you, but he is getting suspicious 
and he informed all his servants and guards to watch me closely. I am feeling 
that the house I live in and the path I walk on are all eyes watching me, and 
fingers pointing at me, and ears listening to the whisper of my thoughts.” 

She was silent for a while, and then she added, with tears pouring down her 
cheeks, “I am not afraid of the Bishop, for wetness does not scare the drowned, 
but I am afraid you might fall into the trap and become his prey; you are still 
young and free as the sunlight. I am not frightened of fate which has shot all its 
arrows in my breast, but I am afraid the serpent might bite your feet and detain 
you from climbing the mountain peak where the future awaits you with its 
pleasure and glory.” 

I said, “He who has not been bitten by the serpents of light and snapped at by 
the wolves of darkness will always be deceived by the days and nights. But 
listen, Selma, listen carefully; is separation the only means of avoiding people’s 
evils and meanness? Has the path of love and freedom been closed and is 
nothing left except submission to the will of the slaves of death?” 

She responded, “Nothing is left save separation and bidding each other 
farewell.” 

With rebellious spirit I took her hand and said excitedly, “We have yielded to 
the people’s will for a long time; since the time we met until this hour we have 
been led by the blind and have worshipped with them before their idols. Since 
the time I met you we have been in the hands of the Bishop like two balls which 
he has thrown around as he pleased. Are we going to submit to his will until 
death takes us away? Did God give us the breath of life to place it under death’s 
feet? Did He give us liberty to make it a shadow of slavery? He who 
extinguishes his spirit’s fire with his own hands is an infidel in the eyes of 
Heaven, for Heaven set the fire that burns in our spirits. He who does not rebel 
against oppression is doing himself injustice. I love you, Selma, and you love 
me, too; and Love is a precious treasure, it is God’s gift to sensitive and great 


spirits. Shall we throw this treasure away and let the pigs scatter it and trample 
on it? This world is full of wonder and beauty. Why are we living in this narrow 
tunnel which the Bishop and his assistants have dug out for us? Life is full of 
happiness and freedom; why don’t we take this heavy yoke off our shoulders and 
break the chains tied to our feet, and walk freely toward peace? Get up and let us 
leave this small temple for God’s great temple. Let us leave this country and all 
its slavery and ignorance for another country far away and unreached by the 
hands of the thieves. Let us go to the coast under the cover of night and catch a 
boat that will take us across the oceans, where we can find a new life full of 
happiness and understanding. Do not hesitate, Selma for these minutes are more 
precious to us than the crowns of kings and more sublime than the thrones of 
angels. Let us follow the column of light that leads us from this arid desert into 
the green fields where flowers and aromatic plants grow.” 

She shook her head and gazed at something invisible on the ceiling of the 
temple; a sorrowful smile appeared on her lips; then she said, “No, no my 
beloved. Heaven placed in my hand a cup, full of vinegar and gall; I forced 
myself to drink it in order to know the full bitterness at the bottom until nothing 
was left save a few drops, which I shall drink patiently. I am not worthy of a new 
life of love and peace; I am not strong enough for life’s pleasure and sweetness, 
because a bird with broken wings cannot fly in the spacious sky. The eyes that 
are accustomed to the dim light of a candle are not strong enough to stare at the 
sun. Do not talk to me of happiness; its memory makes me suffer. Mention not 
peace to me; its shadow frightens me; but look at me and I will show you the 
holy torch which Heaven has lighted in the ashes of my heart—you know that I 
love you as a mother loves her only child, and Love only taught me to protect 
you even from myself. It is Love, purified with fire, that stops me from 
following you to the farthest land. Love kills my desires so that you may live 
freely and virtuously. Limited love asks for possession of the beloved, but the 
unlimited asks only for itself. Love that comes between the naiveté and 
awakening of youth satisfies itself with possessing, and grows with embraces. 
But Love which is born in the firmament’s lap and has descended with the 
night’s secrets is not contended with anything but Eternity and immortality; it 
does not stand reverently before anything except deity. 

When I knew that the Bishop wanted to stop me from leaving his nephew’s 
house and to take my only pleasure away from me, I stood before the window of 
my room and looked toward the sea, thinking of the vast countries beyond it and 
the real freedom and personal independence which can be found there. I felt that 


I was living close to you, surrounded by the shadow of your spirit, submerged in 
the ocean of your affection. But all these thoughts which illuminate a woman’s 
heart and make her rebel against old customs and live in the shadow of freedom 
and justice, made me believe that I am weak and that our love is limited and 
feeble, unable to stand before the sun’s face. I cried like a king whose kingdom 
and treasure have been usurped, but immediately I saw your face through my 
tears and your eyes gazing at me and I remembered what you said to me once 
(Come, Selma, come and let us be strong towers before the tempest. Let us stand 
like brave soldiers before the enemy and face his weapons. If we are killed, we 
shall die as martyrs; and if we win, we shall live as heroes. Braving obstacles 
and hardships is nobler than retreat to tranquillity.) These words, my beloved, 
you uttered when the wings of death were hovering around my father’s bed; I 
remembered them yesterday when the wings of despair were hovering above my 
head. I strengthened myself and felt, while in the darkness of my prison, some 
sort of precious freedom easing our difficulties and diminishing our sorrows. I 
found out that our love was as deep as the ocean and as high as the stars and as 
spacious as the sky. I came here to see you, and in my weak spirit there is a new 
strength, and this strength is the ability to sacrifice a great thing in order to 
obtain a greater one; it is the sacrifice of my happiness so that you may remain 
virtuous and honourable in the eyes of the people and be far away from their 
treachery and persecution. 

In the past, when I came to this place I felt as if heavy chains were pulling 
down on me, but today I came here with a new determination that laughs at the 
shackles and shortens the way. I used to come to this temple like a scared 
phantom, but today I came like a brave woman who feels the urgency of 
sacrifice and knows the value of suffering, a woman who likes to protect the one 
she loves from the ignorant people and from her hungry spirit. I used to sit by 
you like a trembling shadow, but today I came here to show you my true self 
before Ishtar and Christ. 

I am a tree, grown in the shade, and today I stretched my branches to tremble 
for a while in the daylight. I came here to tell you good-bye, my beloved, and it 
is my hope that our farewell will be great and awful like our love. Let our 
farewell be like fire that bends the gold and makes it more resplendent.” 

Selma did not allow me to speak or protest, but she looked at me, her eyes 
glittering, her face retaining its dignity, seeming like an angel worthy of silence 
and respect. Then she flung herself upon me, something which she had never 
done before, and put her smooth arms around me and printed a long, deep, fiery 


kiss on my lips. 

As the sun went down, withdrawing its rays from those gardens and orchards, 
Selma moved to the middle of the temple and gazed along at its walls and 
comers as if she wanted to pour the light of her eyes on its pictures and symbols. 
Then she walked forward and reverently knelt before the picture of Christ and 
kissed His feet, and she whispered, “Oh, Christ, I have chosen Thy Cross and 
deserted Ishtar’s world of pleasure and happiness; I have worn the wreath of 
thorns and discarded the wreath of laurel and washed myself with blood and 
tears instead of perfume and scent; I have drunk vinegar and gall from a cup 
which was meant for wine and nectar; accept me, my Lord, among Thy 
followers and lead me toward Galilee with those who have chosen Thee, 
contended with their sufferings and delighted with their sorrows.” 

When she rose and looked at me and said, “Now I shall return happily to my 
dark cave, where horrible ghosts reside, Do not sympathize with me, my 
beloved, and do not feel sorry for me, because the soul that sees the shadow of 
God once will never be frightened, thereafter, of the ghosts of devils. And the 
eye that looks on heaven once will not be closed by the pains of the world.” 

Uttering these words, Selma left the place of worship; and I remained there 
lost in a deep sea of thoughts, absorbed in the world of revelation where God sits 
on the throne and the angels write down the acts of human beings, and the souls 
recite the tragedy of life, and the brides of Heaven sing the hymns of love, 
sorrow and immortality. 

Night had already come when I awakened from my swoon and found myself 
bewildered in the midst of the gardens, repeating the echo of every word uttered 
by Selma and remembering her silence, ,her actions, her movements, her 
expression and the touch of her hands, until I realized the meaning of farewell 
and the pain of lonesomeness. I was depressed and heart-broken. It was my first 
discovery of the fact that men, even if they are born free, will remain slaves of 
strict laws enacted by their forefathers; and that the firmament, which we 
imagine as unchanging, is the yielding of today to the will of tomorrow and 
submission of yesterday to the will of today—Many a time, since the night, I 
have thought of the spiritual law which made Selma prefer death to life, and 
many a time I have made a comparison between nobility of sacrifice and 
happiness of rebellion to find out which one is nobler and more beautiful; but 
until now I have distilled only one truth out of the whole matter, and this truth is 
sincerity, which makes all our deeds beautiful and honourable. And this sincerity 
was in Selma Karamy. 


Chapter Ten 
The Rescuer 
(> = = C) 


Five years of Selma’s marriage passed without bringing children to strengthen 
the ties of spiritual relation between her and her husband and bind their 
repugnant souls together. 

A barren woman is looked upon with disdain everywhere because of most 
men’s desire to perpetuate themselves through posterity. 

The substantial man considers his childless wife as an enemy; he detests her 
and deserts her and wishes her death. Mansour Bey Galib was that kind of man; 
materially, he was like earth, and hard like steel and greedy like a grave. His 
desire of having a child to carry on his name and reputation made him hate 
Selma in spite of her beauty and sweetness. 

A tree grown in a cave does not bear fruit; and Selma, who lived in the shade 
of life, did not bear children... 

The nightingale does not make his nest in a cage lest slavery be the lot of its 
chicks... Selma was a prisoner of misery and it was Heaven’s will that she 
would not have another prisoner to share her life. The flowers of the field are the 
children of sun’s affection and nature’s love; and the children of men are the 
flowers of love and compassion... 

The spirit of love and compassion never dominated Selma’s beautiful home at 
Ras Beyrouth; nevertheless, she knelt down on her knees every night before 
Heaven and asked God for a child in whom she would find comfort and 
consolation... She prayed successively until Heaven answered her prayers... 

The tree of the cave blossomed to bear fruit at last. The nightingale in the cage 
commenced making its nest with the feathers of its wings. 

Selma stretched her chained arms toward Heaven to receive God’s precious 
gift and nothing in the world could have made her happier than becoming a 
potential mother. 


She waited anxiously, counting the days and looking forward to the time when 
Heaven’s sweetest melody, the voice of her child, should ring in her ears... 

She commenced to see the dawn of a brighter future through her tears. 

It was the month of Nisan when Selma was stretched on the bed of pain and 
labour, where life and death were wrestling. The doctor and the midwife were 
ready to deliver to the world a new guest. Late at night Selma started her 
successive cry... a cry of life’s partition from life... a cry of continuance in the 
firmament of nothingness... a cry of a weak force before the stillness of great 
forces... the cry of poor Selma who was lying down in despair under the feet of 
life and death. 

At dawn Selma gave birth to a baby boy. When she opened her eyes she saw 
smiling faces all over the room, then she looked again and saw life and death 
still wrestling by her bed. She closed her eyes and cried, saying for the first time, 
“Oh, my son.” The midwife wrapped the infant with silk swaddles and placed 
him by his mother, but the doctor kept looking at Selma and sorrowfully shaking 
his head. 

The voices of joy woke the neighbours, who rushed into the house to felicitate 
the father upon the birth of his heir, but the doctor still gazed at Selma and her 
infant and shook his head... 

The servants hurried to spread the good news to Mansour Bey, but the doctor 
stared at Selma and her child with a disappointed look on his face. 

As the sun came out, Selma took the infant to her breast; he opened his eyes 
for the first time and looked at his mother; then he quivered and close them for 
the last time. The doctor took the child from Selma’s arms and on his cheeks fell 
tears; then he whispered to himself, “He is a departing guest.” 

The child passed away while the neighbours were celebrating with the father 
in the big hall at the house and drinking to the health of their heir; and Selma 
looked at the doctor, and pleaded, “Give me my child and let me embrace him.” 

Though the child was dead, the sounds of the drinking cups increased in the 
hall... 

He was born at dawn and died at sunrise... 

He was born like a thought and died like a sigh and disappeared like a 
shadow. 

He did not live to console and comfort his mother. 

His life began at the end of the night and ended at the beginning of the day, 
like a drop of few poured by the eyes of the dark and dried by the touch of the 


light. 

A pearl brought by the tide to the coast and returned by the ebb into the depth 
of the sea... 

A lily that has just blossomed from the bud of life and is mashed under the feet 
of death. 

A dear guest whose appearance illuminated Selma’s heart and whose departure 
killed her soul. 

This is the life of men, the life of nations, the life of suns, moons and stars. 

And Selma focused her eyes upon the doctor and cried, “Give me my child 
and let me embrace him; give me my child and let me nurse him.” 

Then the doctor bent his head. His voice choked and he said, “Your child is 
dead, Madame, be patient. 

Upon hearing her doctor’s announcement, Selma uttered a terrible cry. Then 
she was quiet for a moment and smiled happily. Her face brightened as if she had 
discovered something, and quietly she said, “Give me my child; bring him close 
to me and let me see him dead.” 

The doctor carried the dead child to Selma and placed him between her arms. 
She embraced him, then turned her face toward the wall and addressed the dead 
infant saying, “You have come to take me away my child; you have come to 
show me the way that leads to the coast. Here I am my child; lead me and let us 
leave this dark cave. 

And in a minute the sun’s ray penetrated the window curtains and fell upon 
two calm bodies lying on a bed, guarded by the profound dignity of silence and 
shaded by the wings of death. The doctor left the room with tears in his eyes, and 
as he reached the big hall the celebrations was converted into a funeral, but 
Mansour Bey Galib never uttered a word or shed a tear. He remained standing 


motionless like a statue, holding a drinking cup with his right hand. 
oK OK OK 


The second day Selma was shrouded with her white wedding dress and laid ina 
coffin; the child’s shroud was his swaddle; his coffin was his mother’s arms; his 
grave was her calm breast. Two corpses were carried in one coffin, and I walked 
reverently with the crowd accompanying Selma and her infant to their resting 
place. 

Arriving at the cemetery, Bishop Galib commenced chanting while the other 
priests prayed, and on their gloomy faces appeared a veil of ignorance and 
emptiness. 


As the coffin went down, one of the bystanders whispered, “This is the first 
time in my life I have seen two corpses in one coffin.” Another one said, “It 
seems as if the child had come to rescue his mother from her pitiless husband.” 

A third one said, “Look at Mansour Bey: he is gazing at the sky as if his eyes 
were made of glass. He does not look like he has lost his wife and child in one 
day.” A fourth one added, “His uncle, the Bishop, will marry him again 
tomorrow to a wealthier and stronger woman. 

The Bishop and the priests kept on singing and chanting until the grave digger 
was through filing the ditch. Then, the people, individually, approached the 
Bishop and his nephew and offered their respects to them with sweet words of 
sympathy, but I stood lonely aside without a soul to console me, as if Selma and 
her child meant nothing to me. 

The farewell-bidders left the cemetery; the grave digger stood by the new 
grave holding a shovel with his hand. 

As I approached him, I inquired, “Do you remember where Farris Effandi 
Karamy was buried?” 

He looked at me for a moment, then pointed at Selma’s grave and said, “Right 
here; I placed his daughter upon him and upon his daughter’s breast rests her 
child, and upon all I put the earth back with this shovel.” 

Then I said, “In this ditch you have also buried my heart.” 

As the grave digger disappeared behind the poplar trees, I could not resist 
anymore; I dropped down on Selma’s grave and wept. 


THE EARTH GODS 
() = a C) 


Introduction 

When the night of the twelfth aeon fell, 

And silence, the high tide of night, swallowed the hills, 
The three earth-born gods, the Master Titans of life, 
Appeared upon the mountains. 

Rivers ran about their feet; 

The mist floated across their breasts, 

And their heads rose in majesty above the world. 

Then they spoke, and like distant thunder 

Their voices rolled over the plains. 


First God 

The wind blows eastward; 

I would turn my face to the south, 

For the wind crowds my nostrils with the odours of dead things. 


Second God 
It is the scent of burnt flesh, sweet and bountiful. 
I would breathe it. 


First God 

It is the odour of mortality parching upon its own faint flame. 
Heavily does it hang upon the air, 

And like foul breath of the pit 

It offends my senses. 


I would turn my face to the scentless north. 


Second God 

It is the inflamed fragrance of brooding life 

This I would breathe now and forever. 

Gods live upon sacrifice, 

Their thirst quenched by blood, 

Their hearts appeased with young souls, 

Their sinews strengthened by the deathless sighs 

Of those who dwell with death; 

Their thrones are built upon the ashes of generations. 


First God 

Weary is my spirit of all there is. 

I would not move a hand to create a world 

Nor to erase one. 

I would not live could I but die, 

For the weight of aeons is upon me, 

And the ceaseless moan of the seas exhausts my sleep. 
Could I but lose the primal aim 

And vanish like a wasted sun; 

Could I but strip my divinity of its purpose 

And breathe my immortality into space, 

And be no more; 

Could I but be consumed and pass from time’s memory 
Into the emptiness of nowhere! 


Third God 

Listen my brothers, my ancient brothers. 
A youth in yonder vale 

Is singing his heart to the night. 

His lyre is gold and ebony. 

His voice is silver and gold. 


Second God 

I would not be so vain as to be no more. 

I could not but choose the hardest way; 

To follow the seasons and support the majesty of the years; 
To sow the seed and to watch it thrust through the soil; 
To call the flower from its hiding place 

And give it strength to nestle its own life, 

And then to pluck it when the storm laughs in the forest; 
To raise man from secret darkness, 

Yet keep his roots clinging to the earth; 

To give him thirst for life, and make death his cupbearer; 
To endow him with love that waxeth with pain, 

And exalts with desire, and increases with longing, 

And fadeth away with the first embrace; 

To girdle his nights with dreams of higher days, 

And infuse his days with visions of blissful nights, 

And yet to confine his days and his nights 

To their immutable resemblance; 

To make his fancy like the eagle of the mountain, 

And his thought as the tempests of the seas, 

And yet to give him hands slow in decision, 

And feet heavy with deliberation; 

To give him gladness that he may sing before us, 

And sorrow that he may call unto us, 

And then to lay him low, 

When the earth in her hunger cries for food; 

To raise his soul high above the firmament 

That he may foretaste our tomorrow, 

And to keep his body grovelling in the mire 

That he may not forget his yesterday. 

Thus shall we rule man unto the end of time, 

Governing the breath that began with his mother’s crying, 


And ends with the lamentation of his children. 


First God 

My heart thirsts, yet I would not drink the faint blood of a feeble race, 
For the cup is tainted, and the vintage therein is bitter to my mouth. 
Like thee I have kneaded the clay and fashioned it to breathing forms 
That crept out of my dripping fingers unto the marshes and the hills. 
Like thee I have kindled the dark depths of beginning life 

And watched it crawl from caves to rocky heights. 

Like thee I have summoned spring and laid the beauty thereof 

For a lure that seizes youth and binds it to generate and multiply. 
Like thee I have led man from shrine to shrine, 

And turned his mute fear of things unseen 

To tremulous faith in us, the unvisited and the unknown. 

Like thee I have ridden the wild tempest over his head 

That he might bow before us, 

And shaken the earth beneath him until he cried unto us; 

And like thee, led the savage ocean against his nestled isle, 

Till he hath died calling upon us. 

All this have I done, and more. 

And all that I have done is empty and vain. 

Vain is the waking and empty is the sleep, 

And thrice empty and vain is the dream. 


Third God 

Brothers, my august brothers, 

Down in the myrtle grove 

A girl is dancing to the moon, 

A thousand dew-stars are in her hair, 
About her feet a thousand wings. 


Second God 
We have planted man, our vine, and tilled the soil 


In the purple mist of the first dawn. 

We watched the lean branches grow, 

And through the days of seasonless years 

We nursed the infant leaves. 

From the angry element we shielded the bud, 

And against all dark spirits we guarded the flower. 

And now that our vine hath yielded the grape 

You will not take it to the winepress and fill the cup. 
Whose mightier hand than yours shall reap the fruit? 

And what nobler end than your thirst awaits the wine? 
Man is food for the gods, 

And the glory of man begins 

When his aimless breath is sucked by gods’ hallowed lips. 
All that is human counts for naught if human it remain; 
The innocence of childhood, and the sweet ecstasy of youth, 
The passion of stern manhood, and the wisdom of old age; 
The splendour of kings and the triumph of warriors, 

The fame of poets and the honour of dreamers and saints; 
All these and all that lieth therein is bred for gods. 

And naught but bread ungraced shall it be 

If the gods raise it not to their mouths. 

And as the mute grain turns to love songs when swallowed by the nightingale, 
Even so as bread of gods shall man taste godhead. 


First God 

Aye, man is meat for gods! 

And all that is man shall come upon the gods’ eternal board! 

The pain of child-bearing and the agony of childbirth, 

The blind cry of the infant that pierces the naked night, 

And the anguish of the mother wrestling with the sleep she craves, 
To pour life exhausted from her breast; 

The flaming breath of youth tormented, 

And the burdened sobs of passion unspent; 


The dripping brows of manhood tilling the barren land, 
And the regret of pale old age when life against life’s will 
Calls to the grave. 

Behold this is man! 

A creature bred on hunger and made food for hungry gods. 
A vine that creeps in dust beneath the feet of deathless death. 
The flower that blooms in nights of evil shadows; 

The grape of mournful days, and days of terror and shame. 
And yet you would have me eat and drink. 

You would bid me sit amongst shrouded faces 

And draw my life from stony lips 

And from withered hands receive my eternity. 


Third God 

Brothers, my dreaded brothers, 
Thrice deep the youth is singing, 
And thrice higher is his song. 

His voice shakes the forest 

And pierces the sky, 

And scatters the slumbering of earth. 


Second God 

(Always unhearing) 

The bee hums harshly in your ears, 

And foul is the honey to your lips. 

Fain would I comfort you, 

But how shall I? 

Only the abyss listens when gods call unto gods, 
For measureless is the gulf that lies between divinities, 
And windless is the space. 

Yet I would comfort you, 

I would make serene your clouded sphere; 

And though equal we are in power and judgement, 


I would counsel you. 

When out of chaos came the earth, and we, sons of the beginning, beheld each 
other in the lustless light, we breathed the first hushed, tremulous sound that 
quickened the currents of air and sea. 

Then we walked, hand in hand, upon the grey infant world, and out of the 
echoes of our first drowsy steps time was born, a fourth divinity, that sets his feet 
upon our footprints, shadowing our thoughts and desires, and seeing only with 
our eyes. 

And unto earth came life, and unto life came the spirit, the winged melody of 
the universe. And we ruled life and spirit, and none save us knew the measure of 
the years nor the weight of years’ nebulous dreams, till we, at noontide of the 
seventh aeon, gave the sea in marriage to the sun. 

And from the inner chamber of their nuptial ecstasy, we brought man, a 
creature who, though yielding and infirm, bears ever the marks of his parentage. 


Through man who walks earth with eyes upon the stars, we find pathways to 
earth’s distant regions; and of man, the humble reed growing beside dark waters, 
we make a flute through whose hollowed heart we pour our voice to the silence- 
bound world. From the sunless north to the sun-smitten sand of the south. 


From the lotus land where days are born 

To perilous isles where days are slain, 

Man the faint hearted, overbold by our purpose, 

Ventures with lyre and sword. 

Ours is the will he heralds, 

And ours the sovereignty he proclaims, 

And his love trodden courses are rivers, to the sea of our desires. 
We, upon the heights, in man’s sleep dream our dreams. 

We urge his days to part from the valley of twilights 

And seek their fullness upon the hills. 

Our hands direct the tempests that sweep the world 

And summon man from sterile peace to fertile strife, 

And on to triumph. 

In our eyes is the vision that turns man’s soul to flame, 

And leads him to exalted loneliness and rebellious prophecy, 
And on to crucifixion. 


Man is born to bondage, 

And in bondage is his honour and his reward. 

In man we seek a mouthpiece, 

And in his life our self fulfilment. 

Whose heart shall echo our voice if the human heart is deafened with dust? 

Who shall behold our shining if man’s eye is blinded with night? 

And what would you do with man, child of our earliest heart, our own self 
image? 


Third God 

Brothers, my mighty brothers, 

The dancer’s feet are drunk with songs. 
They set the air a-throbbing, 

And like doves her hands fly upward. 


First God 

The lark calls to the lark, 

But upward the eagle soars, 

Nor tarries to hear the song. 

You would teach me self love fulfilled in man’s worship, 
And content with man’s servitude. 

But myself love is limitless and without measure. 

I would rise beyond my earthbound mortality 

And throne me upon the heavens. 

My arms wood girdle space and encompass the spheres. 
I would take the starry way for a bow, 

And the comets for arrows, 

And with the infinite would I conquer the infinite. 

But you would not do this, were it in your power. 

For ever as man is to man, 

So are gods to gods. 

Nay, you would bring to my weary heart 

Remembrance of cycles spent in mist, 


When my soul sought itself among the mountains 

And mine eyes pursued their own image in slumbering waters; 
Though my yesterday died in child-birth 

And only silence visits her womb, 

And the wind strewn sand nestles at her breast. 


Oh yesterday, dead yesterday, 

Mother of my chained divinity, 

What super-god caught you in your flight 
And made you breed in the cage? 

What giant sun warmed your bosom 

To give me birth? 

I bless you not, yet I would not curse you; 
For even as you have burdened me with life 
So I have burdened man 

But less cruel have I been. 

I, immortal, made man a passing shadow; 
And you, dying, conceived me deathless. 


Yesterday, dead yesterday, 

Shall you return with distant tomorrow, 

That I may bring you to judgment? 

And will you wake with life’s second dawn 

That I may erase your earth-clinging memory from the earth? 
Would that you might rise with all the dead of yore, 

Till the land choke with its own bitter fruit, 

And all the seas be stagnant with the slain, 

And woe upon woe exhaust earth’s vain fertility. 


Third God 

Brother, my sacred brothers, 
The girl has heard the song. 
And now she seeks the singer. 


Like a fawn in glad surprise 

She leaps over rocks and streams 
And turns her to every side. 

Oh, the joy in mortal intent, 

The eye of purpose half-born; 

The smile on lips that quiver 

With foretaste of promised delight! 
What flower has fallen from heaven, 
What flame has risen from hell. 
That startled the heart of silence 

To this breathless joy and fear? 
What dream dreamt we upon the height, 
What thought gave we to the wind 
That woke the drowsing valley 

And made watchful the night? 


Second God 

The sacred loom is given you, 

And the art to weave the fabric. 

The loom and the art shall be yours for evermore, 
And yours the dark thread and the light, 

And yours the purple and the gold. 

Yet you would grudge yourself a raiment. 

Your hands have spun man’s soul 

From living air and fire, 

Yet now you would break the thread, 

And lend your versed fingers to an idle eternity. 


First God 

Nay, unto eternity unmoulded I would give my hands, 
And to untrodden fields assign my feet. 

What joy is there in songs oft heard, 

Whose tune the remembering ear arrests 


Ere the breath yields it to the wind? 

My heart longs for what my heart conceives not, 
And unto the unknown where memory dwells not 

I would command my spirit. 

Oh, tempt me not with glory possessed, 

And seek not to comfort me with your dream or mine, 
For all that I am, and all that there is on earth, 

And all that shall be, inviteth not my soul. 

Oh my soul, 

Silent is thy face, 

And in Thine eyes the shadows of night are sleeping. 
But terrible is thy silence, 

And thou art terrible. 


Third God 

Brothers, my solemn brothers, 

The girl has found the singer. 

She sees his raptured face. 
Panther-like she slips with subtle steps 
Through rustling vine and fern. 

And now amid his ardent cries 

He gazes full on her. 


Oh my brothers, my heedless brothers, 

Is it some other god in passion 

Who has woven this web of scarlet and white? 
What unbridled star has gone astray? 

Whose secret keepeth night from morning? 
And whose hand is upon our world? 


First God 
Oh my soul, my soul, 
Thou burning sphere that girdles me, 


How shall I guide thy course. 
And unto what space direct thy eagerness? 


Oh my mateless soul, 

In thy hunger thou preyest upon thyself, 

And with thine own tears thou wouldst quench thy thirst; 
For night gathers not her dew into thy cup, 

And the day brings thee no fruit. 

Oh my soul, my soul, 

Thou grounded ship laden with desire, 

Whence shall come the wind to fill thy sail, 

And what higher tide shall release thy rudder? 
Weighed is thine anchor and thy wings would spread, 
But the skies are silent above thee, 

And the still sea mocks at thy immobility. 


And what hope is there for thee and me? 

What shifting of worlds, what new purpose in the heavens, 
That shall claim thee? 

Does the womb of the virgin infinite 

Bear the seed of thy Redeemer, 

One mightier than thy vision 

Whose hand shall deliver thee from thy captivity? 


Second God 

Hold your importunate cry, 

And the breath of your burning heart, 

For deaf is the ear of the infinite, 

And heedless is the sky. 

We are the beyond and we are the Most High, 
And between us and boundless eternity 

Is naught save our unshaped passion 

And the motive thereof. 


You invoke the unknown, 

And the unknown clad with moving mist 

Dwells in your own soul. 

Yea, in your own soul your Redeemer lies asleep, 

And in sleep sees what your waking eye does not see. 

And that is the secret of our being. 

Would you leave the harvest ungathered, 

In haste to sow again the dreaming furrow? 

And wherefore spread you your cloud in trackless fields and desolate, 
When your own flock is seeking you, 

And would fain gather in your own shadow? 

Forbear and look down upon the world. 

Behold the unweaned children of your love. 

The earth is your abode, and the earth is your throne; 

And high beyond man’s furtherest hope 

Your hand upholds his destiny. 

You would not abandon him 

Who strives to reach you through gladness and through pain. 
You would not turn away your face from the need in his eyes. 


First God 

Does dawn hold the heart of night unto her heart? 

Or shall the sea heed the bodies of her dead? 

Like dawn my soul rises within me 

Naked and unencumbered. 

And like the unresting sea 

My heart casts out a perishing wrack of man and earth. 
I would not cling to that clings to me. 

But unto that that rises beyond my reach I would arise. 


Third God 
Brothers, behold, my brothers, 


They meet, two star-bound spirits in the sky encountering. 
In silence they gaze the one upon the other. 

He sings no more, 

And yet his sunburnt throat throbs with the song; 
And in her limbs the happy dance is stayed 

But not asleep. 

Brothers, my strange brothers, 

The night waxeth deep, 

And brighter is the moon, 

And twixt the meadow and the sea 

A voice in rapture calleth you and me. 


Second God 

To be, to rise, to burn before the burning sun, 

To live, and to watch the nights of the living 

As Orion watches us! 

To face the four winds with a head crowned and high, 
And to heal the ills of man with our tideless breath! 
The tentmaker sits darkly at his loom, 

And the potter turns his wheel unaware; 

But we, the sleepless and the knowing, 

We are released from guessing and from chance. 
We pause not nor do we wait for thought. 

We are beyond all restless questioning. 

Be content and let the dreaming go. 

Like rivers let us flow to ocean 

Unwounded by the edges of the rocks; 

And when we reach her heart and are merged, 

No more shall we wrangle and reason of tomorrow. 


First God 
Oh, this ache of ceaseless divining, 
This vigil of guiding the day unto twilight, 


And the night unto dawn; 

This tide of ever remembering and forgetting; 

This ever sowing destinies and reaping but hopes; 

This changeless lifting of self from dust to mist, 

Only to long for dust, and to fall down with longing unto dust, 
And still with greater longing to seek the mist again. 

And this timeless measuring of time. 

Must my soul needs to be a sea whose currents forever confound one another, 
Or the sky where the warring winds turn hurricane? 

Were I man, a blind fragment, 

I could have met it with patience. 

Or if I were the Supreme Godhead, 

Who fills the emptiness of man and of gods, 

I would be fulfilled. 

But you and I are neither human, 

Nor the Supreme above us. 

We are but twilights ever rising and ever fading 

Between horizon and horizon. 

We are but gods holding a world and held by it, 

Fates that sound the trumpets 

Whilst the breath and the music come from beyond. 

And I rebel. 

I would exhaust myself to emptiness. 

I would dissolve myself afar from your vision, 

And from the memory of this silent youth, our younger brother, 
Who sits beside us gazing into yonder valley, 

And though his lips move, utters not a word. 


Third God 

I speak, my unheeding brothers, 

I do indeed speak, 

But you hear only your own words. 
I bid you see your glory and mine, 


But you turn, and close your eyes, 

And rock your thrones. 

Ye sovereigns who would govern the above world and the world beneath, 
God self-bent, whose yesterday is ever jealous of your tomorrow, 
Self-weary, who would unleash your temper with speech 
And lash our orb with thunderings! 

Your feud is but the sounding of an Ancient Lyre 

Whose strings have been half forgotten by His fingers 
Who has Orion for a harp and the Pleiades for cymbals. 
Even now, while you are muttering and rumbling, 

His harp rings, His cymbals clash, 

And I beseech you hear his song. 

Behold, man and woman, 

Flame to flame, 

In white ecstasy. 

Roots that suck at the breast of purple earth, 

Flame flowers at the breasts of the sky. 

And we are the purple breast, 

And we are the enduring sky. 

Our soul, even the soul of life, your soul and mine, 
Dwells this night in a throat enflamed, 

And garments the body of a girl with beating waves. 
Your sceptre cannot sway this destiny, 

Your weariness is but ambition. 

This and all is wiped away 

In the passion of a man and a maid. 


Second God 

Yea, what of this love of man and woman? 

See how the east wind dances with her dancing feet, 

And the west wind rises singing with his song. 

Behold our sacred purpose now enthroned, 

In the yielding of a spirit that sings to a body that dances. 


First God 

I will not turn my eyes downward to the conceit of earth, 
Nor to her children in their slow agony that you call love. 
And what is love, 

But the muffled drum and leads the long procession of sweet uncertainty 
To another slow agony? 

I will not look downward. 

What is there to behold 

Save a man and a woman in the forest that grew to trap them 
That they might renounce self 

And parent creatures for our unborn tomorrow? 


Third God 

Oh, the affliction of knowing, 

The starless veil of prying and questioning 

Which we have laid upon the world; 

And the challenge to human forbearance! 

We would lay under a stone a waxen shape 

And say, it is a thing of clay, 

And in clay let it find its end. 

We would hold in our hands a white flame 

And say in our heart, 

It is a fragment of ourselves returning, 

A breath of our breath that had escaped, 

And now haunts our hands and lips for more fragrance. 
Earth gods, my brothers, 

High upon the mountain, 

We are still earth-bound, 

Through man desiring the golden hours of man’s destiny. 
Shall our wisdom ravish beauty from his eyes? 

Shall our measures subdue his passion to stillness, 

Or to our own passion? 


What would your armies of reasoning 

Where love encamps his host? 

They who are conquered by love, 

And upon whose bodies love’s chariot ran 

From sea to mountain 

And again form mountain to the sea, 

Stand even now in a shy half-embrace. 

Petal unto petal they breathe the sacred perfume, 
Soul to soul they find the soul of life, 

And upon their eyelids lies a prayer 

Unto you and unto me. 

Love is a night bent down to a bower anointed, 
A sky turned meadow, and all the stars to fireflies. 
True it is, we are the beyond, 

And we are the most high. 

But love is beyond our questioning, 

And love outsoars our song. 


Second God 

Seek you a distant orb, 

And would not consider this star 

Where your sinews are planted? 

There is no centre in space 

Save where self is wedded to self, 

And beauty filling our hands to shame our lips. 
The most distant is the most near. 

And where beauty is, there are all things. 


Oh, lofty dreaming brother, 

Return to us from time’s dim borderland! 
Unlace your feet from no-where and no-when, 
And dwell with us in this security 


Which your hand intertwined with ours 

Has builded stone upon stone. 

Cast off your mantle of brooding, 

And comrade us, masters of the young earth green and warm. 


First God 

Eternal Altar! Wouldst thou indeed this night 

A god for sacrifice? 

Now then, I come, and coming I offer up 

My passion and my pain. 

Lo, there is the dancer, carved out of our ancient eagerness, 
And the singer is crying mine own songs unto the wind. 
And in that dancing and in that singing 

A god is slain within me. 

My god-heart within my human ribs 

Shouts to my god-heart in mid-air. 

The human pit that wearied me calls to divinity. 

The beauty that we have sought from the beginning 
Calls unto divinity. 

I heed, and I have measured the call, 

And now I yield. 

Beauty is a path that leads to self self-slain. 

Beat your strings 

I will to walk the path. 

It stretches ever to another dawn. 


Third God 

Love triumphs. 

The white and green of love beside a lake, 

And the proud majesty of love in tower or balcony; 
Love in a garden or in the desert untrodden, 

Love is our lord and master. 

It is not a wanton decay of the flesh, 


Nor the crumbling of desire 

When desire and self are wrestling; 

Nor is it flesh that takes arms against the spirit. 

Love rebels not. 

It only leaves the trodden way of ancient destinies for the sacred grove, 
To sing and dance its secret to eternity. 

Love is youth with chains broken, 

Manhood made free from the sod, 

And womanhood warmed by the flame 

And shining with the light of heaven deeper than our heaven. 
Love is a distant laughter in the spirit. 

It is a wild assault that hushes you to your awakening. 

It is anew dawn unto the earth, 

A day not yet achieved in your eyes or mine, 

But already achieved in its own greater heart. 

Brothers, my brothers, 

The bride comes from the heart of dawn, 

And the bridegroom from the sunset. 

There is a wedding in the valley. 

A day too vast for recording. 


Second God 

Thus has it been since the first morn 

Discharged the plains to hill and vale, 

And thus shall it be to the last even-tide. 

Our roots have brought forth the dancing branches in the valley, 
And we are the flowering of the song-scent that rises to the heights. 
Immortal and mortal, twin rivers calling to the sea. 

There is no emptiness between call and call, 

But only in the ear. 

Time maketh our listening more certain, 

And giveth it more desire. 

Only doubt in mortal hushes the sound. 


We have outsoared the doubt. 

Man is a child of our younger heart. 

Man is god in slow arising; 

And betwixt his joy and his pain 

Lies our sleeping, and the dreaming thereof. 


First God 

Let the singer cry, and let the dancer whirl her feet 
And let me be content awhile. 

Let my soul be serene this night. 

Perchance I may drowse, and drowsing 

Behold a brighter world 

And creatures more starry supple to my mind. 


Third God 

Now I will rise and strip me of time and space, 

And I will dance in that field untrodden, 

And the dancer’s feet will move with my feet; 

And I will sing in that higher air, 

And a human voice will throb within my voice. 

We shall pass into the twilight; 

Perchance to wake to the dawn of another world. 

But love shall stay, 

And his finger-marks shall not be erased. 

The blessed forge burns, 

The sparks rise, and each spark is a sun. 

Better it is for us, and wiser, 

To seek a shadowed nook and sleep in our earth divinity, 
And let love, human and frail, command the coming day. 


THE FORERUNNER 


The Forerunner 


> 


You are your own forerunner, and the towers you have builded are but the 
foundation of your giant-self. And that self too shall be a foundation. 

And I too am my own forerunner, for the long shadow stretching before me at 
sunrise shall gather under my feet at the noon hour. Yet another sunrise shall lay 
another shadow before me, and that also shall be gathered at another noon. 

Always have we been our own forerunners, and always shall we be. And all 
that we have gathered and shall gather shall be but seeds for fields yet 
unploughed. We are the fields and the ploughmen, the gatherers and the 
gathered. 

When you were a wandering desire in the mist, I too was there a wandering 
desire. Then we sought one another, and out of our eagerness dreams were born. 
And dreams were time limitless, and dreams were space without measure. 

And when you were a silent word upon life’s quivering lips, I too was there, 
another silent word. Then life uttered us and we came down the years throbbing 
with memories of yesterday and with longing for tomorrow, for yesterday was 
death conquered and tomorrow was birth pursued. 

And now we are in God’s hands. You are a sun in His right hand and I an earth 
in His left hand. Yet you are not more, shining, than I, shone upon. 

And we, sun and earth, are but the beginning of a greater sun and a greater 
earth. And always shall we be the beginning. 

You are your own forerunner, you the stranger passing by the gate of my 
garden. 

And I too am my own forerunner, though I sit in the shadows of my trees and 
seem motionless. 


God’s Fool 
OO ss ~<a C) 


Once there came from the desert to the great city of Sharia a man who was a 
dreamer, and he had naught but his garment and staff. 

And as he walked through the streets he gazed with awe and wonder at the 
temples and towers and palaces, for the city of Sharia was of surpassing beauty. 
And he spoke often to the passers-by, questioning them about their city—but 
they understood not his language, nor he their language. 

At the noon hour he stopped before a vast inn. It was built of yellow marble, 
and people were going in and coming out unhindered. 

“This must be a shrine,’ he said to himself, and he too went in. But what was 
his surprise to find himself in a hall of great splendour and a large company of 
men and women seated about many tables. They were eating and drinking and 
listening to the musicians. 

‘Nay,’ said the dreamer. ‘This is no worshipping. It must be a feast given by 
the prince to the people, in celebration of a great event.’ 

At that moment a man, whom he took to be the slave of the prince, approached 
him, and bade him be seated. And he was served with meat and wine and most 
excellent sweets. 

When he was satisfied, the dreamer rose to depart. At the door he was stopped 
by a large man magnificently arrayed. 

‘Surely this is the prince himself,’ said the dreamer in his heart, and he bowed 
to him and thanked him. 

Then the large man said in the language of the city: 

‘Sir, you have not paid for your dinner.’ And the dreamer did not understand, 
and again thanked him heartily. Then the large man bethought him, and he 
looked more closely upon the dreamer. And he saw that he was a stranger, clad 
in but a poor garment, and that indeed he had not wherewith to pay for his meal. 
Then the large man clapped his hands and called—and there came four 


watchmen of the city. And they listened to the large man. Then they took the 
dreamer between them, and they were two on each side of him. And the dreamer 
noted the ceremoniousness of their dress and of their manner and he looked upon 
them with delight. ‘These,’ said he, ‘are men of distinction.’ 

And they walked all together until they came to the House of Judgement and 
they entered. 

The dreamer saw before him, seated upon a throne, a venerable man with 
flowing beard, robed majestically. And he thought he was the king. And he 
rejoiced to be brought before him. 

Now the watchmen related to the judge, who was the venerable man, the 
charge against the dreamer, and the judge appointed two advocates, one to 
present the charge and the other to defend the stranger. And the advocates rose, 
the one after the other, and delivered each his argument. And the dreamer 
thought himself to be listening to addresses of welcome, and his heart filled with 
gratitude to the king and the prince for all that was done for him. 

Then sentence was passed upon the dreamer, that upon a tablet about his neck 
his crime should be written, and that he should ride through the city on a naked 
horse, with a trumpeter and a drummer before him. And the sentence was carried 
out forthwith. 

Now as the dreamer rode through the city upon the naked horse, with the 
trumpeter and the drummer before him, the inhabitants of the city came running 
forth at the sound of the noise, and when they saw him they laughed one and all, 
and the children ran after him in companies from street to street. And the 
dreamer’s heart was filled with ecstasy, and his eyes shone upon them. For to 
him the tablet was a sign of the king’s blessing and the procession was in his 
honour. 

Now as he rode, he saw among the crowd a man who was from the desert like 
himself and his heart swelled with joy, and he cried out to him with a shout: 

‘Friend! Friend! Where are we? What city of the heart’s desire is this? What 
race of lavish hosts, who feast the chance guest in their palaces, whose princes 
companion him, whose kings hangs a token upon his breast and opens to him the 
hospitality of a city descended from heaven?’ 

And he who was also of the desert replied not. He only smiled and slightly 
shook his head. And the procession passed on. 

And the dreamer’s face was uplifted and his eyes were overflowing with light. 


Love 


They say the jackal and the mole 
Drink from the selfsame stream 
Where the lion comes to drink. 

And they say the eagle and the vulture 
Dig their beaks into the same carcass, 
And are at peace, one with the other, 
In the presence of the dead thing. 


O love, whose lordly hand 

Has bridled my desires, 

And raised my hunger and my thirst 

To dignity and pride, 

Let not the strong in me and the constant 
Eat the bread or drink the wine 

That tempt my weaker self. 


Let me rather starve, 

And let my heart parch with thirst, 
And let me die and perish, 

Ere I stretch my hand 

To a cup you did not fill, 

Or a bowl you did not bless. 


The King-Hermit 
(2 — = C) 


They told me that in a forest among the mountains lives a young man in solitude 
who once was a king of a vast country beyond the Two Rivers. And they also 
said that he, of his own will, had left his throne and the land of his glory and 
come to dwell in the wilderness. 

And I said, “I would seek that man, and learn the secret of his heart; for he 
who renounces a kingdom must needs be greater than a kingdom.” 

On that very day I went to the forest where he dwells. And I found him sitting 
under a white cypress, and in his hand a reed as if it were a sceptre. And I 
greeted him even as I would greet a king. And he turned to me and said gently, 
“What would you in this forest of serenity? Seek you a lost self in the green 
shadows, or is it a home-coming in your twilight?” 

And I answered, “I sought but you—for I fain would know that which made 
you leave a kingdom for a forest.” 

And he said, “Brief is my story, for sudden was the bursting of the bubble. It 
happened thus: one day as I sat at a window in my palace, my chamberlain and 
an envoy from a foreign land were walking in my garden. And as they 
approached my window, the lord chamberlain was speaking of himself and 
saying, ‘I am like the king; I have a thirst for strong wine and a hunger for all 
games of chance. And like my lord the king I have storms of temper.’ And the 
lord chamberlain and the envoy disappeared among the trees. But in a few 
minutes they returned, and this time the lord chamberlain was speaking of me, 
and he was saying, ‘My lord the king is like myself—a good marksman; and like 
me he loves music and bathes thrice a day.’” 

After a moment he added, “On the eve of that day I left my palace with but my 
garment, for I would no longer be ruler over those who assume my vices and 
attribute to me their virtues.” 

And I said, “This is indeed a wonder, and passing strange.” 


And he said, “Nay, my friend, you knocked at the gate of my silences and 
received but a trifle. For who would not leave a kingdom for a forest where the 
seasons sing and dance ceaselessly? Many are those who have given their 
kingdom for less than solitude and the sweet fellowship of aloneness. Countless 
are the eagles who descend from the upper air to live with moles that they may 
know the secrets of the earth. There are those who renounce the kingdom of 
dreams that they may not seem distant from the dreamless. And those who 
renounce the kingdom of nakedness and cover their souls that others may not be 
ashamed in beholding truth uncovered and beauty unveiled. And greater yet than 
all of these is he who renounces the kingdom of sorrow that he may not seem 
proud and vainglorious.” 

Then rising he leaned upon his reed and said, “Go now to the great city and sit 
at its gate and watch all those who enter into it and those who go out. And see 
that you find him who, though born a king, is without kingdom; and him who 
though ruled in flesh rules in spirit—though neither he nor his subjects know 
this; and him also who but seems to rule yet is in truth slave of his own slaves.” 

After he had said these things he smiled on me, and there were a thousand 
dawns upon his lips. Then he turned and walked away into the heart of the 
forest. 

And I returned to the city, and I sat at its gate to watch the passers-by even as 
he had told me. And from that day to this numberless are the kings whose 
shadows have passed over me and few are the subjects over whom my shadow 
passed. 


The Lion’s Daughter 
(2 = = C) 


Four slaves stood fanning an old queen who was asleep upon her throne. And 
she was snoring. And upon the queen’s lap a cat lay purring and gazing lazily at 
the slaves. 

The first slave spoke, and said, “How ugly this old woman is in her sleep. See 
her mouth droop; and she breathes as if the devil were choking her.” 

Then the cat said, purring, “Not half so ugly in her sleep as you in your 
waking slavery.” 

And the second slave said, “You would think sleep would smooth her wrinkles 
instead of deepening them. She must be dreaming of something evil.” 

And the cat purred, “Would that you might sleep also and dream of your 
freedom.” 

And the third slave said, “Perhaps she is seeing the procession of all those that 
she has slain.” 

And the cat purred, “Aye, she sees the procession of your forefathers and your 
descendants.” 

And the fourth slave said, “It is all very well to talk about her, but it does not 
make me less weary of standing and fanning.” 

And the cat purred, “You shall be fanning to all eternity; for as it is on earth, 
so it is in heaven.” 

At this moment the old queen nodded in her sleep, and her crown fell to the 
floor. 

And one of the slaves said, “That is a bad omen.” 

And the cat purred, “The bad omen of one is the good omen of another.” 

And the second slave said, “What if she should wake, and find her crown 
fallen! She would surely slay us.” 

And the cat purred, “Daily from your birth she has slain you and you know it 


3) 


not. 


And the third slave said, “Yes, she would slay us and she would call it making 
a sacrifice to the gods.” 

And the cat purred, “Only the weak are sacrificed to the gods.” 

And the fourth slave silenced the others, and softly he picked up the crown and 
replaced it, without waking her, on the old queen’s head. 

And the cat purred, “Only a slave restores a crown that has fallen.” 

And after a while the old queen woke, and she looked about her and yawned. 
Then she said, “Methought I dreamed, and I saw four caterpillars chased by a 
scorpion around the trunk of an ancient oak tree. I like not my dream.” 

Then she closed her eyes and went to sleep again. And she snored. And the 
four slaves went on fanning her. 

And the cat purred, “Fan on, fan on, stupids. You fan but the fire that 
consumes you.” 


Tyranny 


Thus sings the she-dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea: 

“My mate shall come riding on the waves. His thundering roar shall fill the 
earth with fear, and the flames of his nostrils shall set the sky afire. At the eclipse 
of the moon we shall be wedded, and at the eclipse of the sun I shall give birth to 
a Saint George, who shall slay me.” 

Thus sings the she-dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea. 


The Saint 
2. = = C) 


In my youth I once visited a saint in his silent grove beyond the hills; and as we 
were conversing upon the nature of virtue a brigand came limping wearily up the 
ridge. When he reached the grove he knelt down before the saint and said, “O 
saint, I would be comforted! My sins are heavy upon me.” 

And the saint replied, “My sins, too, are heavy upon me.” 

And the brigand said, “But I am a thief and a plunderer.” 

And the saint replied, “I too am a thief and a plunderer.” 

And the brigand said, “But I am a murderer, and the blood of many men cries 
in my ears.” 

And the saint replied, “I am a murderer, and in my ears cries the blood of 
many men.” 

And the brigand said, “I have committed countless crimes.” 

And the saint replied, “I too have committed crimes without number.” 

Then the brigand stood up and gazed at the saint, and there was a strange look 
in his eyes. And when he left us he went skipping down the hill. 

And I turned to the saint and said, “Wherefore did you accuse yourself of 
uncommitted crimes? See you not this man went away no longer believing in 
you?” 

And the saint answered, “It is true he no longer believes in me. But he went 
away much comforted.” 

At that moment we heard the brigand singing in the distance, and the echo of 
his song filled the valley with gladness. 


The Plutocrat 


In my wanderings I once saw upon an island a man-headed, iron-hoofed monster 
who ate of the earth and drank of the sea incessantly. And for a long while I 
watched him. Then I approached him and said, “Have you never enough; is your 
hunger never satisfied and your thirst never quenched?” 

And he answered saying, “Yes, I am satisfied, nay, I am weary of eating and 
drinking; but I am afraid that tomorrow there will be no more earth to eat and no 
more sea to drink.” 


The Greater Self 


This came to pass. After the coronation of Nufsibaal King of Byblus, he retired 
to his bed-chamber—the very room which the three hermit-magicians of the 
mountains had built for him. He took off his crown and his royal raiment, and 
stood in the centre of the room thinking of himself, now the all-powerful ruler of 
Byblus. 

Suddenly he turned; and he saw stepping out of the silver mirror which his 
mother had given him, a naked man. 

The king was startled, and he cried out to the man, “What would you?” 

And the naked man answered, “Naught but this: Why have they crowned you 
king?” 

And the king answered, “Because I am the noblest man in the land.” 

Then the naked man said, “If you were still more noble, you would not be 
king.” 

And the king said, “Because I am the mightiest man in the land they crowned 
me.” 

And the naked man said, “If you were mightier yet, you would not be king.” 

Then the king said, “Because I am the wisest man they crowned me king.” 

And the naked man said, “If you were still wiser you would not choose to be 
king.” 

Then the king fell to the floor and wept bitterly. 


The naked man looked down upon him. Then he took up the crown and with 
tenderness replaced it upon the king’s bent head. 


And the naked man, gazing lovingly upon the king, entered into the mirror. 
And the king roused, and straightway he looked into the mirror. And he saw 
there but himself crowned. 


War and the Small Nations 


Once, high above a pasture, where a sheep and a lamb were grazing, an eagle 
was circling and gazing hungrily down upon the lamb. And as he was about to 
descend and seize his prey, another eagle appeared and hovered above the sheep 
and her young with the same hungry intent. Then the two rivals began to fight, 
filling the sky with their fierce cries. 

The sheep looked up and was much astonished. She turned to the lamb and 
said: 

“How strange, my child, that these two noble birds should attack one another. 
Is not the vast sky large enough for both of them? Pray, my little one, pray in 
your heart that God may make peace between your winged brothers.” 

And the lamb prayed in his heart. 


Critics 
OO = = C) 


One nightfall a man travelling on horseback towards the sea reached an inn by 
the roadside. He dismounted and, confident in man and night like all riders 
towards the sea, he tied his horse to a tree beside the door and entered into the 
inn. 

At midnight, when all were asleep, a thief came and stole the traveller’s horse. 


In the morning the man awoke, and discovered that his horse was stolen. And 
he grieved for his horse, and that a man had found it in his heart to steal. 

Then his fellow lodgers came and stood around him and began to talk. 

And the first man said, “How foolish of you to tie your horse outside the 
stable.” 

And the second said, “Still more foolish, without even hobbling the horse!” 

And the third man said, “It is stupid at best to travel to the sea on horseback.” 

And the fourth said, “Only the indolent and the slow of foot own horses.” 

Then the traveller was much astonished. At last he cried, “My friends, because 
my horse was stolen, you have hastened one and all to tell me my faults and my 
shortcomings. But strange, not one word of reproach have you uttered about the 
man who stole my horse.” 


Poets 


Four poets were sitting around a bowl of punch that stood on a table. 

Said the first poet, “Methinks I see with my third eye the fragrance of this 
wine hovering in space like a cloud of birds in an enchanted forest.” 

The second poet raised his head and said, “With my inner ear I can hear those 
mist-birds singing. And the melody holds my heart as the white rose imprisons 
the bee within her petals.” 

The third poet closed his eyes and stretched his arm upwards, and said, “I 
touch them with my hand. I feel their wings, like the breath of a sleeping fairy, 
brushing against my fingers.” 

Then the fourth poet rose and lifted up the bowl, and he said, “Alas, friends! I 
am too dull of sight and of hearing and of touch. I cannot see the fragrance of 
this wine, nor hear its song, nor feel the beating of its wings. I perceive but the 
wine itself. Now therefore must I drink it, that it may sharpen my senses and 
raise me to your blissful heights.” 

And putting the bowl to his lips, he drank the punch to the very last drop. 

The three poets, with their mouths open, looked at him aghast, and there was a 
thirsty yet unlyrical hatred in their eyes. 


The Weather-Cock 
Sesar—S 2. 


Said the weather-cock to the wind, “How tedious and monotonous you are! Can 
you not blow any other way but in my face? You disturb my God-given 
stability.” 

And the wind did not answer. It only laughed in space. 


The King of Aradus 


Once the elders of the city of Aradus presented themselves before the king, and 
besought of him a decree to forbid to men all wine and all intoxicants within 
their city. 
And the king turned his back upon them and went out from them laughing. 
Then the elders departed in dismay. 
At the door of the palace they met the lord chamberlain. And the lord 
chamberlain observed that they were troubled, and he understood their case. 
Then he said, “Pity, my friends! Had you found the king drunk, surely he 
would have granted you your petition.” 


Out of My Deeper Heart 


Out of my deeper heart a bird rose and flew skywards. 

Higher and higher did it rise, yet larger and larger did it grow. 

At first it was but like a swallow, then a lark, then an eagle, then as vast as a 
spring cloud, and then it filled the starry heavens. 

Out of my heart a bird flew skywards. And it waxed larger as it flew. Yet it left 
not my heart. 

O my faith, my untamed knowledge, how shall I fly to your height and see 
with you man’s larger self pencilled upon the sky? 

How shall I turn this sea within me into mist, and move with you in space 
immeasurable? 

How can a prisoner within the temple behold its golden domes? 

How shall the heart of a fruit be stretched to envelop the fruit also? 

O my faith, I am in chains behind these bars of silver and ebony, and I cannot 
fly with you. 

Yet out of my heart you rise skyward, and it is my heart that holds you, and I 
shall be content. 


Dynasties 
(2 = = C) 


The queen of Ishana was in travail of childbirth; and the king and the mighty 
men of his court were waiting in breathless anxiety in the great hall of the 
Winged Bulls. 

At eventide there came suddenly a messenger in haste and prostrated himself 
before the king, and said, “I bring glad tidings unto my lord the king, and unto 
the kingdom and the slaves of the king. Mihrab the Cruel, thy life-long enemy, 
the king of Bethroun, is dead.” 

When the king and the mighty men heard this, they all rose and shouted for 
joy; for the powerful Mihrab, had he lived longer, had assuredly overcome 
Ishana and carried the inhabitants captive. 

At this moment the court physician also entered the hall of Winged Bulls, and 
behind him came the royal midwives. And the physician prostrated himself 
before the king, and said, “My lord the king shall live forever, and through 
countless generations shall he rule over the people of Ishana. For unto thee, O 
King, is born this very hour a son, who shall be thy heir.” 

Then indeed was the soul of the king intoxicated with joy, that in the same 
moment his foe was dead and the royal line was established. 

Now in the city of Ishana lived a true prophet. And the prophet was young, 
and bold of spirit. And the king that very night ordered that the prophet should 
be brought before him. And when he was brought, the king said unto him, 
“Prophesy now, and foretell what shall be the future of my son who is this day 
born unto the kingdom.” 

And the prophet hesitated not, but said, “Hearken, O King, and I will indeed 
prophesy of the future of thy son that is this day born. The soul of thy enemy, 
even of thy enemy King Mihrab, who died yester-eve, lingered but a day upon 
the wind. Then it sought for itself a body to enter into. And that which it entered 
into was the body of thy son that is born unto thee this hour.” 


Then the king was enraged, and with his sword he slew the prophet. 

And from that day to this, the wise men of Ishana say one to another secretly, 
“Ts it not known, and has it not been said from of old, that Ishana is ruled by an 
enemy?” 


Knowledge and Half-Knowledge 


Four frogs sat upon a log that lay floating on the edge of a river. Suddenly the 
log was caught by the current and swept slowly down the stream. The frogs were 
delighted and absorbed, for never before had they sailed. 

At length the first frog spoke, and said, “This is indeed a most marvellous log. 
It moves as if alive. No such log was ever known before.” 

Then the second frog spoke, and said, “Nay, my friend, the log is like other 
logs, and does not move. It is the river that is walking to the sea, and carries us 
and the log with it.” 

And the third frog spoke, and said, “It is neither the log nor the river that 
moves. The moving is in our thinking. For without thought nothing moves.” 

And the three frogs began to wrangle about what was really moving. The 
quarrel grew hotter and louder, but they could not agree. 

Then they turned to the fourth frog, who up to this time had been listening 
attentively but holding his peace, and they asked his opinion. 

And the fourth frog said, “Each of you is right, and none of you is wrong. The 
moving is in the log and the water and our thinking also.” 

And the three frogs became very angry, for none of them was willing to admit 
that his was not the whole truth, and that the other two were not wholly wrong. 

Then a strange thing happened. The three frogs got together and pushed the 
fourth frog off the log into the river. 


“Said A Sheet of Snow-White Paper...” 
Sear. 


Said a sheet of snow-white paper, “Pure was I created, and pure will I remain 
forever. I would rather be burnt and turn to white ashes than suffer darkness to 
touch me or the unclean to come near me.” 

The ink-bottle heard what the paper was saying, and it laughed in its dark 
heart; but it never dared to approach her. And the multicoloured pencils heard 
her also, and they too never came near her. 

And the snow-white sheet of paper did remain pure and chaste forever, pure 
and chaste—and empty. 


The Scholar and the Poet 


Said the serpent to the lark, “Thou flyest, yet thou canst not visit the recesses of 
the earth where the sap of life moveth in perfect silence.” 

And the lark answered, “Aye, thou knowest over much, nay thou art wiser then 
all things wise—pity thou canst not fly.” 

And as if he did not hear, the serpent said, “Thou canst not see the secrets of 
the deep, nor move among the treasures of the hidden empire. It was but 
yesterday I lay in a cave of rubies. It is like the heart of a ripe pomegranate, and 
the faintest ray of light turns into a flame-rose. Who but me can behold such 
marvels?” 

And the lark said, “None, none but thee can lie among the crystal memories of 
the cycles—pity thou canst not sing.” 

And the serpent said, “I know a plant whose root descends to the bowels of the 
earth, and he who eats of that root becomes fairer than Ashtarte.” 

And the lark said, “No one, no one but thee could inveil the magic thought of 
the earth—pity thou canst not fly.” 

And the serpent said, “There is a purple stream that runneth under a mountain, 
and he who drinketh of it shall become immortal even as the gods. Surely no 
bird or beast can discover that purple stream.” 

And the lark answered, “If thou willest thou canst become deathless even as 
the gods—pity thou canst not sing.” 

And the serpent said, “I know a buried temple, which I visit once a moon. It 
was built by a forgotten race of giants, and upon its walls are graven the secrets 
of time and space, and he who reads them shall understand that which passeth all 
understanding.” 

And the lark said, “Verily, if thou so desirest thou canst encircle with thy pliant 
body all knowledge of time and space—pity thou canst not fly.” 

Then the serpent was disgusted, and as he turned and entered into his hole he 


muttered, “Empty-headed songster!” 
And the lark flew away singing, “Pity thou canst not sing. Pity, pity, my wise 
one, thou canst not fly.” 


Values 
© a a C) 


Once a man unearthed in his field a marble statue of great beauty. And he took it 
to a collector who loved all beautiful things and offered it to him for sale, and the 
collector bought it for a large price. And they parted. 

And as the man walked home with his money he thought, and he said to 
himself, “How much life this money means! How can anyone give all this for a 
dead carved stone buried and undreamed of in the earth for a thousand years?” 

And now the collector was looking at his statue, and he was thinking, and he 
said to himself, “What beauty! What life! The dream of what a soul!—and fresh 
with the sweet sleep of a thousand years. How can anyone give all this for 
money, dead and dreamless?” 


Other Seas 
Sesser—ae. 


A fish said to another fish, “Above this sea of ours there is another sea, with 
creatures swimming in it—and they live there even as we live here.” 

The fish replied, “Pure fancy! Pure fancy! When you know that everything 
that leaves our sea by even an inch, and stays out of it, dies. What proof have 
you of other lives in other seas?” 


Repentance 
Sse 


On a moonless night a man entered into his neighbour’s garden and stole the 
largest melon he could find and brought it home. 


He opened it and found it still unripe. 
Then behold a marvel! 


The man’s conscience woke and smote him with remorse; and he repented 
having stolen the melon. 


The Dying Man and the Vulture 
SsosP—S 


Wait, wait yet awhile, my eager friend. 

I shall yield but too soon this wasted thing, 
Whose agony overwrought and useless 
Exhausts your patience. 

I would not have your honest hunger 

Wait upon these moments: 

But this chain, though made of breath, 

Is hard to break. 

And the will to die, 

Stronger than all things strong, 

Is stayed by a will to live 

Feebler than all things feeble. 

Forgive me, comrade; I tarry too long. 

It is memory that holds my spirit; 

A procession of distant days, 

A vision of youth spent in a dream, 

A face that bids my eyelids not to sleep, 

A voice that lingers in my ears, 

A hand that touches my hand. 

Forgive me that you have waited too long. 
It is over now, and all is faded: 

The face, the voice, the hand and the mist that brought them hither. 
The knot is untied. 

The cord is cleaved. 

And that which is neither food nor drink is withdrawn. 


Approach, my hungry comrade; 

The board is made ready. 

And the fare, frugal and spare, 

Is given with love. 

Come, and dig your beak here, into the left side, 
And tear out of its cage this smaller bird, 
Whose wings can beat no more: 

I would have it soar with you into the sky. 

Come now, my friend, I am your host tonight, 
And you my welcome guest. 


Beyond My Solitude 


C) 


SesSser—ae. 


Beyond my solitude is another solitude, and to him who dwells therein my 
aloneness is a crowded market-place and my silence a confusion of sounds. 

Too young am I and too restless to seek that above-solitude. The voices of 
yonder valley still hold my ears and its shadows bar my way and I cannot go. 

Beyond these hills is a grove of enchantment and to him who dwells therein 
my peace is but a whirlwind and my enchantment an illusion. 

Too young am I and too riotous to seek that sacred grove. The taste of blood is 
clinging in my mouth, and the bow and the arrows of my fathers yet linger in my 
hand and I cannot go. 

Beyond this burdened self lives my freer self; and to him my dreams are a 
battle fought in twilight and my desires the rattling of bones. 

Too young am I and too outraged to be my freer self. 

And how shall I become my freer self unless I slay my burdened selves, or 
unless all men become free? 

How shall the eagle in me soar against the sun until my fledglings leave the 
nest which I with my own beak have built for them? 


The Last Watch 
O — ~~ C) 


At high tide of night, when the first breath of dawn came upon the wind, the 
forerunner, he who calls himself echo to a voice yet unheard, left his bed- 
chamber and ascended to the roof of his house. Long he stood and looked down 
upon the slumbering city. Then he raised his head, and even as if the sleepless 
spirits of all those asleep had gathered around him, he opened his lips and spoke, 
and he said: 

“My friends and neighbours and you who daily pass my gate, I would speak to 
you in your sleep, and in the valley of your dreams I would walk naked and 
unrestrained; for heedless are your waking hours and deaf are your sound- 
burdened ears. 

“Long did I love you and overmuch. 

“T love the one among you as though he were all, and all as if you were one. 
And in the spring of my heart I sang in your gardens, and in the summer of my 
heart I watched at your threshing-floors. 

“Yea, I loved you all, the giant and the pygmy, the leper and the anointed, and 
him who gropes in the dark even as him who dances his days upon the 
mountains. 

“You, the strong, have I loved, though the marks of your iron hoofs are yet 
upon my flesh; and you the weak, though you have drained my faith and wasted 
my patience. 

“You the rich have I loved, while bitter was your honey to my mouth; and you 
the poor, though you knew my empty-handed shame. 

“You the poet with the bowed lute and blind fingers, you have I loved in self- 
indulgence; and you the scholar ever gathering rotted shrouds in potters’ fields. 

“You the priest I have loved, who sit in the silences of yesterday questioning 
the fate of my tomorrow; and you the worshippers of gods the images of your 
own desires. 


“You the thirsting woman whose cup is ever full, I have loved in 
understanding; and you the woman of restless nights, you too I have loved in 
pity. 

“You the talkative have I loved, saying, ‘Life hath much to say’; and you the 
dumb have I loved, whispering to myself, ‘Says he not in silence that which I 
fain would hear in words?” 

“And you the judge and the critic, I have loved also; yet when you have seen 
me crucified, you said, ‘He bleeds rhythmically, and the pattern his blood makes 
upon his white skin is beautiful to behold.’ 

“Yea, I have loved you all, the young and the old, the trembling reed and the 
oak. 

“But, alas, it was the over-abundance of my heart that turned you from me. 
You would drink love from a cup, but not from a surging river. You would hear 
love’s faint murmur, but when love shouts you would muffle your ears. 

“And because I have loved you all you have said, ‘Too soft and yielding is his 
heart, and too undiscerning is his path. It is the love of a needy one, who picks 
crumbs even as he sits at kingly feasts. And it is the love of a weakling, for the 
strong loves only the strong.” 

“And because I have loved you overmuch you have said, ‘It is but the love of a 
blind man who knows not the beauty of one nor the ugliness of another. And it is 
the love of the tasteless who drinks vinegar even as wine. And it is the love of 
the impertinent and the overweening, for what stranger could be our mother and 
father and sister and brother?’ 

“This you have said, and more. For often in the market-place you pointed your 
fingers at me and said mockingly, ‘There goes the ageless one, the man without 
seasons, who at the noon hour plays games with our children and at eventide sits 
with our elders and assumes wisdom and understanding.’ 

“And I said, ‘I will love them more. Aye, even more. I will hide my love with 
seeming to hate, and disguise my tenderness as bitterness. I will wear an iron 
mask, and only when armed and mailed shall I seek them.’ 

“Then I laid a heavy hand upon your bruises, and like a tempest in the night I 
thundered in your ears. 

“From the housetop I proclaimed you hypocrites, Pharisees, tricksters, false 
and empty earth-bubbles. 

“The short-sighted among you I cursed for blind bats, and those too near the 
earth I likened to soulless moles. 


“The eloquent I pronounced fork-tongued, the silent, stone-lipped, and the 
simple and artless I called the dead never weary of death. 

“The seekers after world knowledge I condemned as offenders of the holy 
spirit and those who would naught but the spirit I branded as hunters of shadows 
who cast their nets in flat waters and catch but their own images. 

“Thus with my lips have I denounced you, while my heart, bleeding within 
me, called you tender names. 

“Tt was love lashed by its own self that spoke. It was pride half slain that 
fluttered in the dust. It was my hunger for your love that raged from the 
housetop, while my own love, kneeling in silence, prayed your forgiveness. 

“But behold a miracle! 

“Tt was my disguise that opened your eyes, and my seeming to hate that woke 
your hearts. 

“And now you love me. 

“You love the swords that stroke you and the arrows that crave your breast. 
For it comforts you to be wounded and only when you drink of your own blood 
can you be intoxicated. 

“Like moths that seek destruction in the flame you gather daily in my garden; 
and with faces uplifted and eyes enchanted you watch me tear the fabric of your 
days. And in whispers you say the one to the other, ‘He sees with the light of 
God. He speaks like the prophets of old. He unveils our souls and unlocks our 
hearts, and like the eagle that knows the way of foxes he knows our ways.’ 

“Aye, in truth, I know your ways, but only as an eagle knows the ways of his 
fledglings. And I fain would disclose my secret. Yet in my need for your 
nearness I feign remoteness, and in fear of the ebb tide of your love I guard the 
floodgates of my love.” 

After saying these things the forerunner covered his face with his hands and 
wept bitterly. For he knew in his heart that love humiliated in its nakedness is 
greater than love that seeks triumph in disguise; and he was ashamed. 

But suddenly he raised his head, and like one waking from sleep he 
outstretched his arms and said, “Night is over, and we children of night must die 
when dawn comes leaping upon the hills; and out of our ashes a mightier love 
shall rise. And it shall laugh in the sun, and it shall be deathless.” 


THE GARDEN OF THE PROPHET 
(2 = C) 


Almustafa, the chosen and the beloved, who was a noon unto his own day, 
returned to the isle of his birth in the month of Tichreen, which is the month of 
remembrance. 

And as his ship approached the harbour, he stood upon its prow, and his 
mariners were about him. And there was a homecoming in his heart. 

And he spoke, and the sea was in his voice, and he said: “Behold, the isle of 
our birth. Even here the earth heaved us, a song and a riddle; a song unto the sky, 
a riddle unto the earth; and what is there between earth and sky that shall carry 
the song and solve the riddle save our own passion? 

“The sea yields us once more to these shores. We are but another wave of her 
waves. She sends us forth to sound her speech, but how shall we do so unless we 
break the symmetry of our heart on rock and sand? 

“For this is the law of mariners and the sea: If you would freedom, you must 
needs turn to mist. The formless is forever seeking form, even as the countless 
nebulae would become suns and moons; and we who have sought much and 
return now to this isle, rigid moulds, we must become mist once more and learn 
of the beginning. And what is there that shall live and rise unto the heights 
except it be broken unto passion and freedom? 

“For ever shall we be in quest of the shores, that we may sing and be heard. 
But what of the wave that breaks where no ear shall hear? It is the unheard in us 
that nurses our deeper sorrow. Yet it is also the unheard which carves our soul to 
form and fashion our destiny.” 

Then one of his mariners came forth and said: “Master, you have captained our 
longing for this harbour, and behold, we have come. Yet you speak of sorrow, 
and of hearts that shall be broken.” 

And he answered him and said: “Did I not speak of freedom, and of the mist 
which is our greater freedom? Yet it is in pain I make pilgrimage to the isle 


where I was born, even like unto a ghost of one slain come to kneel before those 
who have slain him.” 

And another mariner spoke and said: “Behold, the multitudes on the sea-wall. 
In their silence they have foretold even the day and the hour of your coming, and 
they have gathered from their fields and vineyards in their loving need, to await 
you.” 

And Almustafa looked afar upon the multitudes, and his heart was mindful of 
their yearning, and he was silent. 

Then a cry came from the people, and it was a cry of remembrance and of 
entreaty. 

And he looked upon his mariners and said: “And what have I brought them? A 
hunter was IJ, in a distant land. With aim and might I have spent the golden 
arrows they gave me, but I have brought down no game. I followed not the 
arrows. Mayhap they are spreading now in the sun with the pinions of wounded 
eagles that would not fall to the earth. And mayhap the arrow-heads have fallen 
into the hands of those who had need of them for bread and wine. 

“I know not where they have spent their flight, but this I know: they have 
made their curve in the sky. 

“Even so, love’s hand is still upon me, and you, my mariners, still sail my 
vision, and I shall not be dumb. I shall cry out when the hand of the seasons is 
upon my throat, and I shall sing my words when my lips are burned with 
flames.” 

And they were troubled in their hearts because he spoke of these things. And 
one said: “Master, teach us all, and mayhap because your blood flows in our 
veins, and our breath is of your fragrance, we shall understand.” 

The he answered them, and the wind was in his voice, and he said: “Brought 
you me to the isle of my birth to be a teacher? Not yet have I been caged by 
wisdom. Too young am I and too verdant to speak of aught but self, which is 
forever the deep calling upon the deep. 

“Let him who would have wisdom seek it in the buttercup or in a pinch of red 
clay. I am still the singer. Still I shall sing the earth, and I shall sing your lost 
dreaming that walks the day between sleep and sleep. But I shall gaze upon the 


+” 


Sed. 
2 OK Ok 


And now the ship entered the harbour and reached the sea-wall, and he came 
thus to the isle of his birth and stood once more amongst his own people. And a 


great cry arose from their hearts so that the loneliness of his home-coming was 
shaken within him. 

And they were silent awaiting his word, but he answered them not, for the 
sadness of memory was upon him, and he said in his heart: “Have I said that I 
shall sing? Nay, I can but open my lips that the voice of life may come forth and 
go out to the wind for joy and support.” 

Then Karima, she who had played with him, a child, in the Garden of his 
mother, spoke and said: “Twelve years have you hidden your face from us, and 
for twelve years have we hungered and thirsted for your voice.” 

And he looked upon her with exceeding tenderness, for it was she who had 
closed the eyes of his mother when the white wings of death had gathered her. 

And he answered and said: “Twelve years? Said you twelve years, Karima? I 
measured not my longing with the starry rod, nor did I sound the depth thereof. 
For love when love is homesick exhausts time’s measurements and time’s 
soundings. 

“There are moments that hold aeons of separation. Yet parting is naught but an 
exhaustion of the mind. Perhaps we have not parted.” 

And Almustafa looked upon the people, and he saw them all, the youth and the 
aged, the stalwart and the puny, those who were ruddy with the touch of wind 
and sun, and those who were of pallid countenance; and upon their face a light of 
longing and of questioning. 

And one spoke and said: “Master, life has dealt bitterly with our hopes and our 
desires. Our hearts are troubled, and we do not understand. I pray you, comfort 
us, and open to us the meanings of our sorrows.” 

And his heart was moved with compassion, and he said: “Life is older than all 
things living; even as beauty was winged ere the beautiful was born on earth, 
and even as truth was truth ere it was uttered. 

“Life sings in our silences, and dreams in our slumber. Even when we are 
beaten and low, Life is enthroned and high. And when we weep, Life smiles 
upon the day, and is free even when we drag our chains. 

“Oftentimes we call Life bitter names, but only when we ourselves are bitter 
and dark. And we deem her empty and unprofitable, but only when the soul goes 
wandering in desolate places, and the heart is drunken with over-mindfulness of 
self. 

“Life is deep and high and distant; and though only your vast vision can reach 
even her feet, yet she is near; and though only the breath of your breath reaches 


her heart, the shadow of your shadow crosses her face, and the echo of your 
faintest cry becomes a spring and an autumn in her breast. 

“And Life is veiled and hidden, even as your greater self is hidden and veiled. 
Yet when Life speaks, all the winds become words; and when she speaks again, 
the smiles upon your lips and the tears in your eyes turn also into words. When 
she sings, the deaf hear and are held; and when she comes walking, the sightless 
behold her and are amazed and follow her in wonder and astonishment.” 

And he ceased from speaking, and a vast silence enfolded the people, and in 
the silence there was an unheard song, and they were comforted of their 


loneliness and their aching. 
mK OK OK 


And he left them straightway and followed the path which led to his Garden, 
which was the Garden of his mother and his father, wherein they lay asleep, they 
and their forefathers. 

And there were those who would have followed after him, seeing that it was a 
home-coming, and he was alone, for there was not one left of all his kin to 
spread the feast of welcome, after the manner of his people. 

But the captain of his ship counselled them saying: “Suffer him to go upon his 
way. For his bread is the bread of aloneness, and in his cup is the wine of 
remembrance, which he would drink alone.” 

And his mariners held their steps, for they knew it was even as the captain of 
the ship had told them. And all those who gathered upon the sea-wall restrained 
the feet of their desire. 

Only Karima went after him, a little way, yearning over his aloneness and his 
memories. And she spoke not, but turned and went unto her own house, and in 
the garden under the almond-tree she wept, yet she knew not wherefore. 

mK OK OK 
And Almustafa came and found the Garden of his mother and his father, and he 
entered in, and closed the gate that no man might come after him. 

And for forty days and forty nights he dwelt alone in that house and that 
Garden, and none came, not even unto the gate, for it was closed, and all the 
people knew that he would be alone. 

And when the forty days and nights were ended, Almustafa opened the gate 
that they might come in. 

And there came nine men to be with him in the Garden; three mariners from 


his own ship; three who had been his comrades in play when they were but 
children together. And these were his disciples. 

And on a morning his disciples sat around him, and there were distances and 
remembrances in his eyes. And that disciple who was called Hafiz said unto him: 
“Master, tell us of the city of Orphalese, and of that land wherein you tarried 
those twelve years.” 

And Almustafa was silent, and he looked away towards the hills and toward 
the vast ether, and there was a battle in his silence. 

Then he said: “My friends and my road-fellows, pity the nation that is full of 
beliefs and empty of religion. 

“Pity the nation that wears a cloth it does not weave, eats a bread it does not 
harvest, and drinks a wine that flows not from its own winepress. 

“Pity the nation that acclaims the bully as hero, and that deems the glittering 
conqueror bountiful. 

“Pity the nation that despises a passion in its dream, yet submits in its 
awakening. 

“Pity the nation that raises not its voice save when it walks in a funeral, boasts 
not except when its neck is laid between the sword and the block. 

“Pity the nation whose statesman is a fox, whose philosopher is a juggle, and 
whose art is the art of patching and mimicking. 

“Pity the nation that welcomes its new ruler with trumpetings, and farewells 
him with hootings, only to welcome another with trumpetings again. 

“Pity the nation whose sages are dumb with years and whose strong men are 
yet in the cradle. 

“Pity the nation divided into fragments, each fragment deeming itself a 


nation.” 
ok OK OOK 


And one said: “Speak to us of that which is moving in your own heart even 


” 


now. 
And he looked upon that one, and there was in his voice a sound like a star 
singing, and he said: “In your waking dream, when you are hushed and listening 
to your deeper self, your thoughts, like snow- flakes, fall and flutter and garment 
all the sounds of your spaces with white silence. 
“And what are waking dreams but clouds that bud and blossom on the sky-tree 
of your heart? And what are your thoughts but the petals which the winds of 


your heart scatter upon the hills and its fields? 

“And even as you wait for peace until the formless within you takes form, so 
shall the cloud gather and drift until the Blessed Fingers shape its grey desire to 
little crystal suns and moons and stars.” 

Then Sarkis, he who was the half-doubter, spoke and said: “But spring shall 
come, and all the snows of our dreams and our thoughts shall melt and be no 
more.” 

And he answered saying: “When Spring comes to seek His beloved amongst 
the slumbering groves and vineyards, the snows shall indeed melt and shall run 
in streams to seek the river in the valley, to be the cup-bearer to the myrtle-trees 
and laurel. 

“So shall the snow of your heart melt when your Spring is come, and thus 
shall your secret run in streams to seek the river of life in the valley. And the 
river shall enfold your secret and carry it to the great sea. 

“All things shall melt and turn into songs when Spring comes. Even the stars, 
the vast snow-flakes that fall slowly upon the larger fields, shall melt into 
singing streams. When the sun of His face shall rise above the wider horizon, 
then what frozen symmetry would not turn into liquid melody? And who among 
you would not be the cup-bearer to the myrtle and the laurel? 

“Tt was but yesterday that you were moving with the moving sea, and you 
were shoreless and without a self. Then the wind, the breath of Life, wove you, a 
veil of light on her face; then her hand gathered you and gave you form, and 
with a head held high you sought the heights. But the sea followed after you, and 
her song is still with you. And though you have forgotten your parentage, she 
will forever assert her motherhood, and for ever will she call you unto her. 

“In your wanderings among the mountains and the desert you will always 
remember the depth of her cool heart. And though oftentimes you will not know 
for what you long, it is indeed for her vast and rhythmic peace. 

“And how else can it be? In grove and in bower when the rain dances in leaves 
upon the hill, when snow falls, a blessing and a covenant; in the valley when you 
lead your flocks to the river; in your fields where brooks, like silver streams. 
Join together the green garment; in your gardens when the early dews mirror the 
heavens; in your meadows when the mist of evening half veils your way; in all 
these the sea is with you, a witness to your heritage, and a claim upon your love. 


“Tt is the snow-flake in you running down to the sea.” 
oK OK OK 


And on a morning as they walked in the Garden, there appeared before the gate a 
woman, and it was Karima, she whom Almustafa had loved even as a sister in 
his boyhood. And she stood without, asking nothing, nor knocking with her hand 
upon the gate, but only gazing with longing and sadness into the Garden. 

And Almustafa saw the desire upon her eyelids, and with swift steps he came 
to the wall and the gate and opened unto her, and she came in and was made 
welcome. 

And she spoke and said: “Wherefore have you withdrawn yourself from us 
altogether, that we may not live in the light of your countenance? For behold, 
these many years have we loved you and waited with longing for your safe 
return. And now the people cry for you and would have speech with you; and I 
am their messenger come to beseech you that you will show yourself to the 
people, and speak to them out of your wisdom, and comfort the broken of heart 
and instruct our foolishness.” 

And looking upon her, he said: “Call me not wise unless you call all men wise. 
A young fruit am I, still clinging to the branch, and it was only yesterday that I 
was but a blossom. 

“And call none among you foolish, for in truth we are neither wise nor foolish. 
We are green leaves upon the tree of life, and life itself is beyond wisdom, and 
surely beyond foolishness. 

“And have I indeed withdrawn myself from you? Know you not that there is 
no distance save that which the soul does not span in fancy? And when the soul 
shall span that distance, it becomes a rhythm in the soul. 

“The space that lies between you and your near neighbour unbefriended is 
indeed greater than that which lies between you and your beloved who dwells 
beyond seven lands and seven seas. 

“For in remembrance there are no distances; and only in oblivion is there a 
gulf that neither your voice nor your eye can abridge. 

“Between the shores of the oceans and the summit of the highest mountain 
there is a secret road which you must needs travel ere you become one with the 
sons of earth. 

“And between your knowledge and your understanding there is a secret path 
which you must needs discover ere you become one with man, and therefore one 
with yourself. 

“Between your right hand that gives and your left hand that receives there is a 
great space. Only by deeming them both giving and receiving can you bring 


them into spacelessness, for it is only in knowing that you have naught to give 
and naught to receive that you can overcome space. 

“Verily the vastest distance is that which lies between your sleep-vision and 
your wakefulness; and between that which is but a deed and that which is a 
desire. 

“And there is still another road which you must needs travel ere you become 
one with Life. But of that road I shall not speak now, seeing that you are weary 


already of travelling.” 
mK OK OK 


Then he went forth with the woman, he and the nine, even unto the market- 
place, and he spoke to the people, his friends and his neighbours, and there was 
joy in their hearts and upon their eyelids. 

And he said: “You grow in sleep, and live your fuller life in you dreaming. For 
all your days are spent in thanksgiving for that which you have received in the 
stillness of the night. 

“Oftentimes you think and speak of night as the season of rest, yet in truth 
night is the season of seeking and finding. 

“The day gives unto you the power of knowledge and teaches your fingers to 
become versed in the art of receiving; but it is night that leads you to the 
treasure-house of Life. 

“The sun teaches to all things that grow their longing for the light. But it is 
night that raises them to the stars. 

“Tt is indeed the stillness of the night that weaves a wedding-veil over the trees 
in the forest, and the flowers in the garden, and then spreads the lavish feast and 
makes ready the nuptial chamber; and in that holy silence tomorrow is conceived 
in the womb of Time. 

‘Thus it is with you, and thus, in seeking, you find meat and fulfilment. And 
though at dawn your awakening erases the memory, the board of dreams is 


forever spread, and the nuptial chamber waiting.” 
mK OK OK 


And he was silent for a space, and they also, awaiting his word. Then he spoke 
again, saying: “You are spirits though you move in bodies; and like oil that burns 
in the dark, you are flames though held in lamps. 


“If you were naught save bodies, then my standing before you and speaking 
unto you would be but emptiness, even as the dead calling unto the dead. But 


this is not so. All that is deathless in you is free unto the day and the night and 
cannot be housed nor fettered, for this is the will of the Most High. You are His 
breath even as the wind that shall be neither caught nor caged. And I also am the 
breath of His breath.” 


ok OOK OK 


And he went from their midst walking swiftly and entered again into the 
Garden. 

And Sarkis, he who was the half-doubter, spoke and said: “And what of 
ugliness, Master? You speak never of ugliness.” 

And Almustafa answered him, and there was a whip in his words, and he said: 
“My friend, what man shall call you inhospitable if he shall pass by your house, 
yet would not knock at your door? 

“And who shall deem you deaf and unmindful if he shall speak to you in a 
strange tongue of which you understand nothing? 

“Ts it not that which you have never striven to reach, into whose heart you 
have never desired to enter, that you deem ugliness? 

“Tf ugliness is aught, indeed, it is but the scales upon our eyes, and the wax 
filling our ears. 

“Call nothing ugly, my friend, save the fear of a soul in the presence of its own 


memories.” 
ok OK OOK 


And upon a day as they sat in the long shadows of the white poplars, one spoke 
saying: “Master, I am afraid of time. It passes over us and robs us of our youth, 
and what does it give in return?” 

And he answered and said: “Take up now a handful of good earth. Do you find 
in it a seed, and perhaps a worm? If your hand were spacious and enduring 
enough, the seed might become a forest, and the worm a flock of angels. And 
forget not that the years which turn seeds to forests, and worms to angels, belong 
to this Now, all of the years, this very Now. 

“And what are the seasons of the years save your own thoughts changing? 
Spring is an awakening in your breast, and summer but a recognition of your 
own fruitfulness. Is not autumn the ancient in you singing a lullaby to that which 
is still a child in your being? And what, I ask you, is winter save sleep big with 
the dreams of all the other seasons.” 

And the Mannus, the inquisitive disciple, looked about him and he saw plants 


in flower cleaving unto the sycamore-tree. And he said: “Behold the parasites, 
Master. What say you of them? They are thieves with weary eyelids who steal 
the light from the steadfast children of the sun, and make fair of the sap that 
runneth into their branches and their leaves.” 

And he answered him saying: “My friend, we are all parasites. We who labour 
to turn the sod into pulsing life are not above those who receive life directly 
from the sod without knowing the sod. 

“Shall a mother say to her child: ‘I give you back to the forest, which is your 
greater mother, for you weary me, heart and hand’? 

“Or shall the singer rebuke his own song, saying: ‘Return now to the cave of 
echoes from whence you came, for your voice consumes my breath’? 

“And shall the shepherd say to his yearling: ‘I have no pasture whereunto I 
may lead you; therefore be cut off and become a sacrifice for this cause’? 

“Nay, my friend, all these things are answered even before they are asked, and, 
like your dreams, are fulfilled ere you sleep. 

“We live upon one another according to the law, ancient and timeless. Let us 
live thus in loving-kindness. We seek one another in our aloneness, and we walk 
the road when we have no hearth to sit beside. 

“My friends and my brothers, the wider road is your fellow-man. 

“These plants that live upon the tree draw milk of the earth in the sweet 
stillness of night, and the earth in her tranquil dreaming sucks at the breast of the 
sun. 

“And the sun, even as you and I and all there is, sits in equal honour at the 
banquet of the Prince whose door is always open and whose board is always 
spread. 

“Mannus, my friend, all there is lives always upon all there is; and all there is 
lives in the faith, shoreless, upon the bounty of the Most High.” 


mK OK OK 
And on a morning when the sky was yet pale with dawn, they walked all 
together in the Garden and looked unto the East and were silent in the presence 
of the rising sun. 

And after a while Almustafa pointed with his hand, and said: “The image of 
the morning sun in a dewdrop is not less than the sun. The reflection of life in 
your soul is not less than life. 

“The dewdrop mirrors the light because it is one with light, and you reflect life 


because you and life are one. 

“When darkness is upon you, say: “This darkness is dawn not yet born; and 
though night’s travail be full upon me, yet shall dawn be born unto me even as 
unto the hills.’ 

“The dewdrop rounding its sphere in the dusk of the lily is not unlike yourself 
gathering your soul in the heart of God. 

“Shall a dewdrop say: ‘But once in a thousand years I am a dewdrop,’ speak 
you and answer it saying: ‘Know you not that the light of all the years is shining 
in your circle?’” 

mK OK OK 


And on an evening a great storm visited the place, and Almustafa and his 
disciples, the nine, went within and sat about the fire and were silent. 

Then one of the disciples said: “I am alone, Master, and the hoofs of the hours 
beat heavily upon my breast.” 

And Almustafa rose up and stood in their midst, and he said in a voice like 
unto the sound of a great wind: “Alone! And what of it? You came alone, and 
alone shall you pass into the mist. 

“Therefore drink your cup alone and in silence. The autumn days have given 
other lips other cups and filled them with wine bitter and sweet, even as they 
have filled your cup. 

“Drink your cup alone though it taste of your own blood and tears, and praise 
life for the gift of thirst. For without thirst your heart is but the shore of a barren 
sea, songless and without a tide. 

“Drink your cup alone, and drink it with cheers. 

“Raise it high above your head and drink deep to those who drink alone. 

“Once I sought the company of men and sat with them at their banquet-tables 
and drank deep with them; but their wine did not rise to my head, nor did it flow 
into my bosom. It only descended to my feet. My wisdom was left dry and my 
heart was locked and sealed. Only my feet were with them in their fog. 

“And I sought the company of men no more, nor drank wine with them at their 
board. 

“Therefore I say unto you, though the hoofs of the hours beat heavily upon 
your bosom, what of it? It is well for you to drink your cup of sorrow alone, and 


your cup of joy shall you drink alone also.” 
mK OK OK 


And on a day, as Phardrous, the Greek, walked in the Garden, he struck his foot 
upon a stone and he was angered. And he turned and picked up the stone, saying 
in a low voice: “O dead thing in my path!” and he flung away the stone. 

And Almustafa, the chosen and the beloved, said: “Why say you: ‘O dead 
thing’? Have you been thus long in this Garden and know not that there is 
nothing dead here? All things live and glow in the knowledge of the day and the 
majesty of the night. You and the stone are one. There is a difference only in 
heart-beats. Your heart beats a little faster, does it, my friend? Ay, but it is not so 
tranquil. 

“Tts rhythm may be another rhythm, but I say unto you that if you sound the 
depths of your soul and scale the heights of space, you shall hear one melody, 
and in that melody the stone and the star sing, the one with the other, in perfect 
unison. 

“If my words reach not your understanding, then let be until another dawn. If 
you have cursed this stone because in your blindness you have stumbled upon it, 
then would you curse a star if so be your head should encounter it in the sky. But 
the day will come when you will gather stones and stars as a child plucks the 
valley-lilies, and then shall you know that all these things are living and 


fragrant.” 
mK OK OK 


And on the first day of the week when the sounds of the temple bells sought their 
ears, one spoke and said: “Master, we hear much talk of God hereabout. What 
say you of God, and who is He in very truth?” 

And he stood before them like a young tree, fearless of wind or tempest, and 
he answered saying: “Think now, my comrades and beloved, of a heart that 
contains all your hearts, a love that encompasses all your loves, a spirit that 
envelops all your spirits, a voice enfolding all your voices, and a silence deeper 
than all your silences, and timeless. 

“Seek now to perceive in your self-fullness a beauty more enchanting than all 
things beautiful, a song more vast than the songs of the sea and the forest, a 
majesty seated upon the throne for which Orion is but a footstool, holding a 
sceptre in which the Pleiades are naught save the glimmer of dewdrops. 

“You have sought always only food and shelter, a garment and a staff; seek 
now One who is neither an aim for your arrows nor a stony cave to shield you 
from the elements. 

“And if my words are a rock and a riddle, then seek, none the less, that your 


hearts may be broken, and that your questionings may bring you unto the love 
and the wisdom of the Most High, whom men call God.” 

And they were silent, every one, and they were perplexed in their heart; and 
Almustafa was moved with compassion for them, and he gazed with tenderness 
upon them and said: “Let us speak rather of the gods, your neighbours, and of 
your brothers, the elements that move about your houses and your fields. 

“You would rise up in fancy unto the cloud, and you deem it height; and you 
would pass over the vast sea and claim it to be distance. But I say unto you that 
when you sow a Seed in the earth, you reach a greater height; and when you hail 
the beauty of the morning to your neighbour, you cross a greater sea. 

“Too often do you sing God, the Infinite, and yet in truth you hear not the 
song. Would that you might listen to the song-birds, and to the leaves that 
forsake the branch when the wind passes by, and forget not, my friends, that 
these sing only when they are separated from the branch! 

“Again I bid you to speak not so freely of God, who is your All, but speak 
rather and understand one another, neighbour unto neighbour, a god unto a god. 

“For what shall feed the fledgling in the nest if the mother bird flies skyward? 
And what anemone in the fields shall be fulfilled unless it be husbanded by a bee 
from another anemone? 

“Tt is only when you are lost in your smaller selves that you seek the sky which 
you call God. Would that you might find paths into your vast selves; would that 
you might be less idle and pave the roads! 

“My mariners and my friends, it were wiser to speak less of God, whom we 
cannot understand, and more of each other, whom we may understand. Yet I 
would have you know that we are the breath and the fragrance of God. We are 


God, in leaf, in flower, and oftentimes in fruit.” 
KK OK 


And on a morning when the sun was high, one of the disciples, one of those 
three who had played with him in childhood, approached him saying: “Master, 
my garment is worn, and I have no other. Give me leave to go unto the market- 
place and bargain that perchance I may procure me new raiment.” 

And Almustafa looked upon the young man, and he said: “Give me your 
garment.” And he did so and stood naked in the noonday. 

And Almustafa said in a voice that was like a young steed running upon a 
road: “Only the naked live in the sun. Only the artless ride the wind. And he 
alone who loses his way a thousand times shall have a home-coming. 


“The angels are tired of the clever. And it was but yesterday that an angel said 
to me: ‘We created hell for those who glitter. What else but fire can erase a 
shining surface and melt a thing to its core?’ 

“And I said: ‘But in creating hell you created devils to govern hell.’ But the 
angel answered: ‘Nay, hell is governed by those who do not yield to fire.’ 

“Wise angel! He knows the ways of men and the ways of half-men. He is one 
of the seraphim who come to minister unto the prophets when they are tempted 
by the clever. And no doubt he smiled when the prophets smile, and weeps also 
when they weep. 

“My friends and my mariners, only the naked live in the sun. Only the 
rudderless can sail the greater sea. Only he who is dark with the night shall wake 
with the dawn, and only he who sleeps with the roots under the snow shall reach 
the spring. 

“For you are even like roots, and like roots are you simple, yet you have 
wisdom from the earth. And you are silent, yet you have within your unborn 
branches the choir of the four winds. 

“You are frail and you are formless, yet you are the beginning of giant oaks, 
and of the half-pencilled patterned of the willows against the sky. 

“Once more I say, you are but roots betwixt the dark sod and the moving 
heavens. And oftentimes have I seen you rising to dance with the light, but I 
have also seen you shy. All roots are shy. They have hidden their hearts so long 
that they know not what to do with their hearts. 

“But May shall come, and May is a restless virgin, and she shall mother the 


hills and plains.” 
oK OK OK 


And one who had served in the Temple besought him saying: “Teach us, Master, 
that our words may be even as your words, a chant and an incense unto the 
people.” 

And Almustafa answered and said: “You shall rise beyond your words, but 
your path shall remain, a rhythm and a fragrance; a rhythm for lovers and for all 
who are beloved, and a fragrance for those who would live life in a garden. 

“But you shall rise beyond your words to a summit whereon the star-dust falls, 
and you shall open your hands until they are filled; then you shall lie down and 
sleep like a white fledgling in a white nest, and you shall dream of your 
tomorrow as white violets dream of spring. 

“Ay, and you shall go down deeper than your words. You shall seek the lost 


fountain-heads of the streams, and you shall be a hidden cave echoing the faint 
voices of the depths which now you do not even hear. 

“You shall go down deeper than your words, ay, deeper than all sounds, to the 
very heart of the earth, and there you shall be alone with Him who walks also 
upon the Milky Way.” 

And after a space one of the disciples asked him saying: “Master, speak to us 
of being. What is it to be?” 

And Almustafa looked long upon him and loved him. And he stood up and 
walked a distance away from them; then returning, he said: “In this Garden my 
father and my mother lie, buried by the hands of the living; and in this Garden 
lie buried the seeds of yesteryear, bought hither upon the wings of the wind. A 
thousand times shall my mother and my father be buried here, and a thousand 
times shall the wind bury the seed; and a thousand years hence shall you and I 
and these flowers come together in this Garden even as now, and we shall be, 
loving life, and we shall be, dreaming of space, and we shall be, rising towards 
the sun. 

“But now today to be is to be wise, though not a stranger to the foolish; it is to 
be strong, but not to the undoing of the weak; to play with young children, not as 
fathers, but rather as playmates who would learn their games; 

“To be simple and guileless with old men and women, and to sit with them in 
the shade of the ancient oak-trees, though you are still walking with Spring; 

“To seek a poet though he may live beyond the seven rivers, and to be at peace 
in his presence, nothing wanting, nothing doubting, and with no question upon 
your lips; 

“To know that the saint and the sinner are twin brothers, whose father is our 
Gracious King, and that one was born but the moment before the other, 
wherefore we regard his as the Crowned Prince; 

“To follow Beauty even when she shall lead you to the verge of the precipice; 
and though she is winged and you are wingless, and though she shall pass 
beyond the verge, follow her, for where Beauty is not, there is nothing; 

“To be a garden without walls, a vineyard without a guardian, a treasure-house 
for ever open to passers-by; 

“To be robbed, cheated, deceived, ay, misled and trapped and then mocked, yet 
with it all to look down from the height of your larger self and smile, knowing 
that there is spring that will come to your garden to dance in your leaves, and an 
autumn to ripen your grapes; knowing that if but one of your windows is open to 


the East, you shall never be empty; knowing that all those deemed wrongdoers 
and robbers, cheaters and deceivers are your brothers in need, and that you are 
perchance all of these in the eyes of the blessed inhabitants of that City Invisible, 
above this city. 

“And now, to you also whose hands fashion and find all things that are needful 
for the comfort of our days and our nights— 

“To be is to be a weaver with seeing fingers, a builder mindful of light and 
space; to be a ploughman and feel that you are hiding a treasure with every seed 
you sow; to be a fisherman and a hunter with a pity for the fish and for the beast, 
yet a still greater pity for the hunger and need of man. 

“And, above all, I say this: I would have you each and every one partners to 
the purpose of every man, for only so shall you hope to obtain your own good 
purpose. 

“My comrades and my beloved, be bold and not meek; be spacious and not 
confined; and until my final hour and yours be indeed your greater self.” 

And he ceased speaking and there fell a deep gloom upon the nine, and their 
heart was turned away from him, for they understood not his words. 

And behold, the three men who were mariners longed for the sea; and they 
who had served in the Temple yearned for the consolation of her sanctuary; and 
they who had been his playfellows desired the market-place. They all were deaf 
to his words, so that the sound of them returned unto him like weary and 
homeless birds seeking refuge. 

And Almustafa walked a distance from them in the Garden, saying nothing, 
nor looking upon them. 

And they began to reason among themselves and to seek excuse for their 
longing to be gone. 

And behold, they turned and went every man to his own place, so that 
Almustafa, the chosen and the beloved, was left alone. 

mK OK OK 
And when the night was fully come, he took his steps to the grave-side of his 
mother and sat beneath the cedar-tree which grew above the place. And there 
came the shadow of a great light upon the sky, and the Garden shone like a fair 
jewel upon the breast of earth. 

And Almustafa cried out in the aloneness of his spirit, and he said: 

“Heavy-laden is my soul with her own ripe fruit. Who is there would come 


and take and be satisfied? Is there not one who has fasted and who is kindly and 
generous in heart, to come and break his fast upon my first yieldings to the sun 
and thus ease me of the weight of mine own abundance? 

“My soul is running over with the wine of the ages. Is there no thirsty one to 
come and drink? 

“Behold, there was a man standing at the cross-roads with hands stretched 
forth unto the passers-by, and his hands were filled with jewels. And he called 
upon the passers-by, saying: ‘Pity me, and take from me. In God’s name, take 
out of my hands and console me.’ 

“But the passers-by only looked upon him, and none took out of his hand. 

“Would rather that he were a beggar stretching forth his hand to receive—ay, a 
shivering hand, and brought back empty to his bosom—than to stretch it forth 
full of rich gifts and find none to receive. 

“And behold, there was also the gracious prince who raised up his silken tents 
between the mountain and the desert and bade his servants to burn fire, a sign to 
the stranger and the wanderer; and who sent forth his slaves to watch the road 
that they might fetch a guest. But the roads and the paths of the desert were 
unyielding, and they found no one. 

“Would rather that prince were a man of nowhere and nowhen, seeking food 
and shelter. Would that he were the wanderer with naught but his staff and an 
earthen vessel. For then at nightfall would he meet with his kind, and with the 
poets of nowhere and nowhen, and share their beggary and their remembrances 
and their dreaming. 

“And behold, the daughter of the great king rose from sleep and put upon her 
silken raiment and her pearls and rubies, and she scattered musk upon her hair 
and dipped her fingers in amber. Then she descended from her tower to her 
garden, where the dew of night found her golden sandals. 

“In the stillness of the night the daughter of a ploughman, tending his sheep in 
a field, and returning to her father’s house at eventide with the dust of the 
curving roads upon her feet, and the fragrance of the vineyards in the folds of her 
garment. 

And when the night is come, and the angel of the night is upon the world, she 
would steal her steps to the river-valley where her lover awaits. 

“Would that she were a nun in a cloister burning her heart for incense, that her 
heart may rise to the wind, and exhausting her spirit, a candle, for a light arising 
toward the greater light, together with all those who worship and those who love 


and are beloved. 

“Would rather that she were a woman ancient of years, sitting in the sun and 
remembering who had shared her youth.” 

And the night waxed deep, and Almustafa was dark with the night, and his 
spirit was as a cloud unspent. And he cried again: 


“Heavy-laden is my soul with her own ripe fruit; 

Heavy-laden is my soul with her fruit. 

Who now will come and eat and be fulfilled? 

My soul is overflowing with her wine. 

Who now will pour and drink and be cooled of the desert heat? 


“Would that I were a tree flowerless and fruitless, 

For the pain of abundance is more bitter than barrenness, 

And the sorrow of the rich from whom no one will take 

Is greater than the grief of the beggar to whom none would give. 


“Would that I were a well, dry and parched, and men throwing stones into me; 
For this were better and easier to be borne than to be a source of living water 
When men pass by and will not drink. 


“Would that I were a reed trodden under foot, 

For that were better than to be a lyre of silvery strings 
In a house whose lord has no fingers 

And whose children are deaf.” 


Now, for seven days and seven nights no man came nigh the Garden, and he 
was alone with is memories and his pain; for even those who had heard his 
words with love and patience had turned away to the pursuits of other days. 

Only Karima came, with silence upon her face like a veil; and with cup and 
plate within her hand, drink and meat for his aloneness and his hunger. And after 


setting these before him, she walked her way. 
oK OK OK 


And Almustafa came again to the company of the white poplars within the gate, 


and he sat looking upon the road. And after a while he beheld as it were a cloud 
of dust blown above the road and coming toward him. And from out the cloud 
came the nine, and before them Karima guiding them. 

And Almustafa advanced and met them upon the road, and they passed 
through the gate, and all was well, as though they had gone their path but an 
hour ago. 

They came in and supped with him at his frugal board, after that Karima had 
laid upon it the bread and the fish and poured the last of the wine into the cups. 
And as she poured, she besought the Master saying: “Give me leave that I go 
into the city and fetch wine to replenish your cups, for this is spent.” 

And he looked upon her, and in his eyes were a journey and a far country, and 
he said: “Nay, for it is sufficient unto the hour.” 

And they ate and drank and were satisfied. And when it was finished, 
Almustafa spoke in a vast voice, deep as the sea and full as a great tide under the 
moon, and he said: “My comrades and my road-fellows, we must needs part this 
day. Long have we climbed the steepest mountains and we have wrestled with 
the storms. We have known hunger, but we have also sat at wedding-feasts. 
Oftentimes have we been naked, but we have also worn kingly raiment. We have 
indeed travelled far, but now we part. Together you shall go your way, and alone 
must I go mine. 

“And though the seas and the vast lands shall separate us, still we shall be 
companions upon our journey to the Holy Mountain. 

“But before we go our severed roads, I would give unto you the harvest and 
the gleaning of my heart: 

“Go you upon your way with singing, but let each song be brief, for only the 
songs that die young upon your lips shall live in human hearts. 

“Tell a lovely truth in little words, but never an ugly truth in any words. Tell 
the maiden whose hair shines in the sun that she is the daughter of the morning. 
But if you shall behold the sightless, say not to him that he is one with night. 

“Listen to the flute-player as it were listening to April, but if you shall hear the 
critic and the fault-finder speak, be deaf as your own bones and as distant as 
your fancy. 

“My comrades and my beloved, upon your way you shall meet men with 
hoofs; give them your wings. And men with horns; give them wreaths of laurel. 
And men with claws; give them petals for fingers. And men with forked tongues; 
give them honey words. 


“Ay, you shall meet all these and more; you shall meet the lame selling 
crutches; and the blind, mirrors. And you shall meet the rich men begging at the 
gate of the Temple. 

“To the lame give your swiftness, to the blind of your vision; and see that you 
give of yourself to the rich beggars; they are the most needy of all, for surely no 
man would stretch a hand for alms unless he be poor indeed, though of great 
possessions. 

“My comrades and my friends, I charge you by our love that you be countless 
paths which cross one another in the desert, where the lions and the rabbits walk, 
and also the wolves and the sheep. 

“And remember this of me: I teach you not giving, but receiving; not denial, 
but fulfilment; and not yielding, but understanding, with the smile upon the lips. 

“T teach you not silence, but rather a song not over-loud. 

“T teach you your larger self, which contains all men.” 

And he rose from the board and went out straightway into the Garden and 
walked under the shadow of the cypress-trees as the day waned. And they 
followed him, at a little distance, for their heart was heavy, and their tongue 
clave to the roof of their mouth. 

Only Karima, after she had put by the fragments, came unto him and said: 
“Master, I would that you suffer me to prepare food against the morrow and your 
journey.” 

And he looked upon her with eyes that saw other worlds that this, and he said: 
“My sister, and my beloved, it is done, even from the beginning of time. The 
food and the drink is ready, for the morrow, even as for our yesterday and our 
today. 

“T go, but if I go with a truth not yet voiced, that very truth will again seek me 
and gather me, though my elements be scattered throughout the silences of 
eternity, and again shall I come before you that I may speak with a voice born 
anew out of the heart of those boundless silences. 

“And if there be aught of beauty that I have declared not unto you, then once 
again shall I be called, ay, even by mine own name, Almustafa, and I shall give 
you a sign, that you may know I have come back to speak all that is lacking, for 
God will not suffer Himself to be hidden from man, nor His word to lie covered 
in the abyss of the heart of man. 


“T shall live beyond death, and I shall sing in your ears 


Even after the vast sea-wave carries me back 

To the vast sea-depth. 

I shall sit at your board though without a body, 

And I shall go with you to your fields, a spirit invisible. 

I shall come to you at your fireside, a guest unseen. 

Death changes nothing but the masks that cover our faces. 
The woodsman shall be still a woodsman, 

The ploughman, a ploughman, 


And he who sang his song to the wind shall sing it also to the moving 
spheres.” 


And the disciples were as still as stones, and grieved in their heart for that he 
had said: “I go.” But no man put out his hand to stay the Master, nor did any 
follow after his footsteps. 

And Almustafa went out from the Garden of his mother, and his feet were 
swift and they were soundless; and in a moment, like a blown leaf in a strong 
wind, he was far gone from them, and they saw, as it were, a pale light moving 
up to the heights. 

And the nine walked their ways down the road. But the woman still stood in 
the gathering night, and she beheld how the light and the twilight were become 
one; and she comforted her desolation and her aloneness with his words: “I go, 
but if I go with a truth not yet voiced, that very truth will seek me and gather me, 


and again shall I come.” 
mK OK OK 


And now it was eventide. 


And he had reached the hills. His steps had led him to the mist, and he stood 
among the rocks and the white cypress-trees hidden from all things, and he 
spoke and said: 


“O Mist, my sister, white breath not yet held in a mould, 
TI return to you, a breath white and voiceless, 


A word not yet uttered. 


“O Mist, my winged sister mist, we are together now, 


And together we shall be till life’s second day, 
Whose dawn shall lay you, dewdrops in a garden, 
And me a babe upon the breast of a woman, 

And we shall remember. 


“O Mist, my sister, I come back, a heart listening in its depths, 
Even as your heart, 

A desire throbbing and aimless even as your desire, 

A thought not yet gathered, even as your thought. 


“O Mist, my sister, first-born of my mother, 

My hands still hold the green seeds you bade me scatter, 
And my lips are sealed upon the song you bade me sing; 
And I bring you no fruit, and I bring you no echoes 

For my hands were blind, and my lips unyielding. 


“O Mist, my sister, much did I love the world, and the world loved me, 

For all my smiles were upon her lips, and all her tears were in my eyes. 
Yet there was between us a gulf of silence which she would not abridge 
And I could not overstep. 


“O Mist, my sister, my deathless sister Mist, 

I sang the ancient songs unto my little children, 

And they listened, and there was wondering upon their face; 
But tomorrow perchance they will forget the song, 

And I know not to whom the wind will carry the song. 

And though it was not mine own, yet it came to my heart 
And dwelt for a moment upon my lips. 


“O Mist, my sister, though all this came to pass, 
Iam at peace. 

It was enough to sing to those already born. 
And though the singing is indeed not mine, 


Yet it is of my heart’s deepest desire. 


“O Mist, my sister, my sister Mist, 

Iam one with you now. 

No longer am La self. 

The walls have fallen, 

And the chains have broken; 

TI rise to you, a mist, 

And together we shall float upon the sea until life’s second day, 
When dawn shall lay you, dewdrops in a garden, 

And me a babe upon the breast of a woman.” 


I BELIEVE IN YOU 
(2 — = C) 


I believe in you, and I believe in your destiny. 

I believe that you are contributors to this new civilization. 

I believe that you have inherited from your forefathers an ancient dream, a 
song, a prophecy, which you can proudly lay as a gift of gratitude upon the lap of 
America. 

I believe that you can say to the founders of this great nation, “Here I am, a 
youth, a young tree whose roots were plucked from the hills of Lebanon, yet I 
am deeply rooted here, and I would be fruitful.” 

And I believe that you can say to Abraham Lincoln, the blessed, “Jesus of 
Nazareth touched your lips when you spoke, and guided your hand when you 
wrote; and I shall uphold all that you have said and all that you have written.” 

I believe that you can say to Emerson and Whitman and James, “In my veins 
runs the blood of the poets and wise men of old, and it is my desire to come to 
you and receive, but I shall not come with empty hands.” 

I believe that even as your fathers came to this land to produce riches, you 
were born here to produce riches by intelligence, by labor. 

I believe that it is in you to be good citizens. 

And what is it to be a good citizen? 

It is to acknowledge the other person’s rights before asserting your own, but 
always to be conscious of your own. 

It is to be free in word and deed, but it is also to know that your freedom is 
subject to the other person’s freedom. 

It is to create the useful and the beautiful with your own hands, and to admire 
what others have created in love and with faith. 

It is to produce by labor and only by labor, and to spend less than you have 
produced that your children may not be dependent upon the state for support 
when you are no more. 


It is to stand before the towers of New York and Washington, Chicago and San 
Francisco saying in your heart, “I am the descendant of a people that builded 
Damascus and Byblos, and Tyre and Sidon and Antioch, and now I am here to 
build with you, and with a will.” 

You should be proud of being an American, but you should also be proud that 
your fathers and mothers came from a land upon which God laid His gracious 
hand and raised His messengers. 

Young Americans of Syrian origin, I believe in you. 


JESUS THE SON OF MAN 


His words and His deeds as told and recorded by those who knew 
Him 


James, the Son of Zebedee 
On the Kingdoms of the World 
2 = = C) 


Upon a day in the spring of the year Jesus stood in the market-place of Jerusalem 
and He spoke to the multitudes of the kingdom of heaven. 

And He accused the scribes and the Pharisees of setting snares and digging 
pitfalls in the path of those who long after the kingdom; and He denounced 
them. 

Now amongst the crowd was a company of men who defended the Pharisees 
and the scribes, and they sought to lay hands upon Jesus and upon us also. 

But He avoided them and turned aside from them, and walked towards the 
north gate of the city. 

And He said to us, “My hour has not yet come. Many are the things I have still 
to say unto you, and many are the deeds I shall yet perform ere I deliver myself 
up to the world.” 

Then He said, and there was joy and laughter in His voice, “Let us go into the 
North Country and meet the spring. Come with me to the hills, for winter is past 
and the snows of Lebanon are descending to the valleys to sing with the brooks. 

“The fields and the vineyards have banished sleep and are awake to greet the 
sun with their green figs and tender grapes.” 

And He walked before us and we followed Him, that day and the next. 

And upon the afternoon of the third day we reached the summit of Mount 
Hermon, and there He stood looking down upon the cities of the plains. 

And His face shone like molten gold, and He outstretched His arms and He 
said to us, “Behold the earth in her green raiment, and see how the streams have 
hemmed the edges of her garments with silver. 

“Tn truth the earth is fair and all that is upon her is fair. 

“But there is a kingdom beyond all that you behold, and therein I shall rule. 


And if it is your choice, and if it is indeed your desire, you too shall come and 
rule with me. 

“My face and your faces shall not be masked; our hand shall hold neither 
sword nor sceptre, and our subjects shall love us in peace and shall not be in fear 
of us.” 

Thus spoke Jesus, and unto all the kingdoms of the earth I was blinded, and 
unto all the cities of walls and towers; and it was in my heart to follow the 
Master to His kingdom. 

Then just at that moment Judas of Iscariot stepped forth. And he walked up to 
Jesus, and spoke and said, “Behold, the kingdoms of the world are vast, and 
behold the cities of David and Solomon shall prevail against the Romans. If you 
will be the king of the Jews we shall stand beside you with sword and shield and 
we Shall overcome the alien.” 

But when Jesus heard this He turned upon Judas, and His face was filled with 
wrath. And He spoke in a voice terrible as the thunder of the sky and He said, 
“Get you behind me, Satan. Think you that I came down the years to rule an ant- 
hill for a day? 

“My throne is a throne beyond your vision. Shall he whose wings encircle the 
earth seek shelter in a nest abandoned and forgotten? 

“Shall the living be honoured and exalted by the wearer of shrouds?” 

“My kingdom is not of this earth, and my seat is not builded upon the skulls of 
your ancestors. 

“If you seek aught save the kingdom of the spirit then it were better for you to 
leave me here, and go down to the caves of your dead, where the crowned heads 
of yore hold court in their tombs and may still be bestowing honours upon the 
bones of your forefathers. 

“Dare you tempt me with a crown of dross, when my forehead seeks the 
Pleiades, or else your thorns? 

“Were it not for a dream dreamed by a forgotten race I would not suffer your 
sun to rise upon my patience, nor your moon to throw my shadow across your 
path. 

“Were it not for a mother’s desire I would have stripped me of the swaddling- 
clothes and escaped back to space. 

“And were it not for sorrow in all of you I would not have stayed to weep. 

“Who are you and what are you, Judas Iscariot? And why do you tempt me? 


“Have you in truth weighed me in the scale and found me one to lead legions 
of pygmies, and to direct chariots of the shapeless against an enemy that 
encamps only in your hatred and marches nowhere but in your fear? 

“Too many are the worms that crawl about me feet, and I will give them no 
battle. 1 am weary of the jest, and weary of pitying the creepers who deem me 
coward because I will not move among their guarded walls and towers. 

“Pity it is that I must needs pity to the very end. Would that I could turn my 
steps towards a larger world where larger men dwell. But how shall I? 

“Your priest and your emperor would have my blood. They shall be satisfied 
ere I go hence. I would not change the course of the law. And I would not govern 
folly. 

“Let ignorance reproduce itself until it is weary of its own offspring. 

“Let the blind lead the blind to the pitfall. 

“And let the dead bury the dead till the earth be choked with its own bitter 
fruit. 

“My kingdom is not of the earth. My kingdom shall be where two or three of 
you shall meet in love, and in wonder at the loveliness of life, and in good cheer, 
and in remembrance of me.” 

Then of a sudden He tured to Judas, and He said, “Get you behind me, man. 
Your kingdoms shall never be in my kingdom.” 

oK OK OK 
And now it was twilight, and He turned to us and said, “Let us go down. The 
night is upon us. Let us walk in light while the light is with us.” 

Then He went down from the hills and we followed Him. And Judas followed 
afar off. 

And when we reached the lowland it was night. 

And Thomas, the son of Diophanes, said unto Him, “Master, it is dark now, 
and we can no longer see the way. If it is in your will, lead us to the lights of 
yonder village where we may find meat and shelter.” 

And Jesus answered Thomas, and He said, “I have led you to the heights when 
you were hungry, and I have brought you down to the plains with a greater 
hunger. But I cannot stay with you this night. I would be alone.” 

Then Simon Peter stepped forth, and said: 

Master, suffer us not to go alone in the dark. Grant that we may stay with you 
even here on this byway. The night and the shadows of the night will not linger, 


and the morning shall soon find us if you will but stay with us.” 

And Jesus answered, “This night the foxes shall have their holes, and the birds 
of the air their nests, but the Son of Man has not where on earth to lay His head. 
And indeed I would now be alone. Should you desire me you will find me again 
by the lake where I found you.” 

Then we walked away from Him with heavy hearts, for it was not in our will 
to leave Him. 

Many times did we stop and turn our faces towards Him, and we saw him in 
lonely majesty, moving westward. 

The only man among us who did not turn to behold Him in His aloneness was 
Judas Iscariot. 

And from that day Judas became sullen and distant. And methought there was 
danger in the sockets of his eyes. 


Anna, the Mother of Mary 
On the Birth of Jesus 
2 = = C) 


Jesus the son of my daughter, was born here in Nazareth in the month of January. 
And the night that Jesus was born we were visited by men from the East. They 
were Persians who came to Esdraelon with the caravans of the Midianites on 
their way to Egypt. And because they did not find rooms at the inn they sought 
shelter in our house. 

And I welcomed them and I said, “My daughter has given birth to a son this 
night. Surely you will forgive me if I do not serve you as it behoves a hostess.” 

Then they thanked me for giving them shelter. And after they had supped they 
said to me: “We would see the new-born.” 

Now the Son of Mary was beautiful to behold, and she too was comely. 

And when the Persians beheld Mary and her babe, they took gold and silver 
from their bags, and myrrh and frankincense, and laid them all at the feet of the 
child. 

Then they fell down and prayed in a strange tongue which we did not 
understand. 

And when I led them to the bedchamber prepared for them they walked as if 
they were in awe at what they had seen. 

When morning was come they left us and followed the road to Egypt. 

But at parting they spoke to me and said, “The child is not but a day old, yet 
we have seen the light of our God in His eyes and the smile of our God upon His 
mouth. 

“We bid you protect Him that He may protect you all.” 

And so saying, they mounted their camels and we saw them no more. 

Now Mary seemed not so much joyous in her first-born, as full of wonder and 
surprise. 


She would look upon her babe, and then turn her face to the window and gaze 
far away into the sky as if she saw visions. 

And there were valleys between her heart and mine. 

And the child grew in body and in spirit, and He was different from other 
children. He was aloof and hard to govern, and I could not lay my hand upon 
Him. 

But He was beloved by everyone in Nazareth, and in my heart I knew why. 

Oftentimes He would take away our food to give to the passer-by. And He 
would give other children the sweetmeat I had given Him, before He had tasted 
it with His own mouth. 

He would climb the trees of my orchard to get the fruits, but never to eat them 
Himself. 

And He would race with other boys, and sometimes, because He was swifter 
of foot, He would delay so that they might pass the stake ere He should reach it. 

And sometimes when I led Him to His bed He would say, “Tell my mother and 
the others that only my body will sleep. My mind will be with them till their 
mind come to my morning.” 

And many other wondrous words He said when He was a boy, but I am too old 
to remember. 

Now they tell me I shall see Him no more. But how shall I believe what they 
say? 

I still hear His laughter, and the sound of His running about my house. And 
whenever I kiss the cheek of my daughter His fragrance returns to my heart, and 
His body seems to fill my arms. 

But is it not passing strange that my daughter does not speak of her first-born 
to me? 

Sometimes it seems that my longing for Him is greater than hers. She stands as 
firm before the day as if she were a bronzen image, while my heart melts and 
runs into streams. 

Perhaps she knows what I do not know. Would that she might tell me also. 


Assaph, Called the Orator of Tyre 
On the Speech of Jesus 
> = = C) 


What shall I say of His speech? Perhaps something about His person lent power 
to His words and swayed those who heard Him. For He was comely, and the 
sheen of the day was upon His countenance. 

Men and women gazed at Him more than they listened to His argument. But at 
times He spoke with the power of a spirit, and that spirit had authority over those 
who heard Him. 

In my youth I had heard the orators of Rome and Athens and Alexandria. The 
young Nazarene was unlike them all. 

They assembled their words with an art to enthral the ear, but when you heard 
Him your heart would leave you and go wandering into regions not yet visited. 

He would tell a story or relate a parable, and the like of His stories and 
parables had never been heard in Syria. He seemed to spin them out of the 
seasons, even as time spins the years and the generations. 

He would begin a story thus: “The ploughman went forth to the field to sow 
his seeds.” 

Or, “Once there was a rich man who had many vineyards.” 

Or, “A shepherd counted his sheep at eventide and found that one sheep was 
missing.” 

And such words would carry His listeners into their simpler selves, and into 
the ancient of their days. 

At heart we are all ploughmen, and we all love the vineyard. And in the 
pastures of our memory there is a shepherd and a flock and the lost sheep. 

And there is the plough-share and the winepress and the threshing-floor. 

He knew the source of our older self, and the persistent thread of which we are 
woven. 


The Greek and the Roman orators spoke to their listeners of life as it seemed 
to the mind. The Nazarene spoke of a longing that lodged in the heart. 

They saw life with eyes only a little clearer than yours and mine. He saw life 
in the light of God. 

I often think that He spoke to the crowd as a mountain would speak to the 
plain. 

And in His speech there was a power that was not commanded by the orators 
of Athens or of Rome. 


Mary Magdalene 
On Meeting Jesus for the First Time 
(> = = C) 


It was in the month of June when I saw Him for the first time. He was walking in 
the wheat field when I passed by with my handmaidens, and He was alone. 

The rhythm of His steps was different from other men’s, and the movement of 
His body was like naught I had seen before. 

Men do not pace the earth in that manner. And even now I do not know 
whether He walked fast or slow. 

My handmaidens pointed their fingers at Him and spoke in shy whispers to 
one another. And I stayed my steps for a moment, and raised my hand to hail 
Him. But He did not turn His face, and He did not look at me. And I hated Him. 
I was swept back into myself, and I was as cold as if I had been in a snow-drift. 
And I shivered. 

That night I beheld Him in my dreaming; and they told me afterward that I 
screamed in my sleep and was restless upon my bed. 

It was in the month of August that I saw Him again, through my window. He 
was sitting in the shadow of the cypress tree across my garden, and He was still 
as if He had been carved out of stone, like the statues in Antioch and other cities 
of the North Country. 

And my slave, the Egyptian, came to me and said, “That man is here again. He 
is sitting there across your garden.” 

And I gazed at Him, and my soul quivered within me, for He was beautiful. 

His body was single and each part seemed to love every other part. 

Then I clothed myself with raiment of Damascus, and I left my house and 
walked towards Him. 

Was it my aloneness, or was it His fragrance, that drew me to Him? Was it a 
hunger in my eyes that desired comeliness, or was it His beauty that sought the 


light of my eyes? 

Even now I do not know. 

I walked to Him with my scented garments and my golden sandals, the sandals 
the Roman captain had given me, even these sandals. And when I reached Him, I 
said, “Good-morrow to you.” 

And He said, “Good-morrow to you, Miriam.” 

And He looked at me, and His night-eyes saw me as no man had seen me. And 
suddenly I was as if naked, and I was shy. 

Yet He had only said, “Good-morrow to you.” 

And then I said to Him, “Will you not come to my house?” 

And He said, “Am I not already in your house?” 

I did not know what He meant then, but I know now. 

And I said, “Will you not have wine and bread with me?” 

And He said, “Yes, Miriam, but not now.” 

Not now, not now, He said. And the voice of the sea was in those two words, 
and the voice of the wind and the trees. And when He said them unto me, life 
spoke to death. 

For mind you, my friend, I was dead. I was a woman who had divorced her 
soul. I was living apart from this self which you now see. I belonged to all men, 
and to none. They called me harlot, and a woman possessed of seven devils. I 
was cursed, and I was envied. 

But when His dawn-eyes looked into my eyes all the stars of my night faded 
away, and I became Miriam, only Miriam, a woman lost to the earth she had 
known, and finding herself in new places. 

And now again I said to Him, “Come into my house and share bread and wine 
with me.” 

And He said, “Why do you bid me to be your guest?” 

And I said, “I beg you to come into my house.” And it was all that was sod in 
me, and all that was sky in me calling unto Him. 

Then He looked at me, and the noontide of His eyes was upon me, and He 
said, “You have many lovers, and yet I alone love you. Other men love 
themselves in your nearness. I love you in yourself. Other men see a beauty in 
you that shall fade away sooner than their own years. But I see in you a beauty 
that shall not fade away, and in the autumn of your days that beauty shall not be 
afraid to gaze at itself in the mirror, and it shall not be offended. 


“T alone love the unseen in you.” 

Then He said in a low voice, “Go away now. If this cypress tree is yours and 
you would not have me sit in its shadow, I will walk my way.” 

And I cried to Him and I said, “Master, come to my house. I have incense to 
bum for you, and a silver basin for your feet. You are a stranger and yet not a 
stranger. I entreat you, come to my house.” 

Then He stood up and looked at me even as the seasons might look down upon 
the field, and He smiled. And He said again: “All men love you for themselves. I 
love you for yourself.” 

And then He walked away. 

But no other man ever walked the way He walked. Was it a breath born in my 
garden that moved to the east? Or was it a storm that would shake all things to 
their foundations? 

I knew not, but on that day the sunset of His eyes slew the dragon in me, and I 
became a woman, I became Miriam, Miriam of Mijdel. 


Philemon, a Greek Apothecary 
On Jesus the Master Physician 
2 = = C) 


The Nazarene was the Master Physician of His people. No other man knew so 
much of our bodies and of their elements and properties. 

He made whole those who were afflicted with diseases unknown to the Greeks 
and the Egyptians. They say He even called back the dead to life. And whether 
this be true or not true, it declares His power; for only to him who has wrought 
great things is the greatest ever attributed. 

They say also that Jesus visited India and the Country between the Two 
Rivers, and that there the priests revealed to Him the knowledge of all that is 
hidden in the recesses of our flesh. 

Yet that knowledge may have been given to Him direct by the gods, and not 
through the priests. For that which has remained unknown to all men for an eon 
may be disclosed to one man in but a moment. And Apollo may lay his hand on 
the heart of the obscure and make it wise. 

Many doors were open to the Tyrians and the Thebans, and to this man also 
certain sealed doors were opened. He entered the temple of the soul, which is the 
body; and He beheld the evil spirits that conspire against our sinews, and also 
the good spirits that spin the threads thereof. 

Methinks it was by the power of opposition and resistance that He healed the 
sick, but in a manner unknown to our philosophers. He astonished fever with His 
snow-like touch and it retreated; and He surprised the hardened limbs with His 
own calm and they yielded to Him and were at peace. 

He knew the ebbing sap within the furrowed bark—but how He reached the 
sap with His fingers I do not know. He knew the sound steel underneath the rust 
—but how He freed the sword and made it shine no man can tell. 

Sometimes it seems to me that He heard the murmuring pain of all things that 
grow in the sun, and that then He lifted them up and supported them, not only by 


His own knowledge, but also by disclosing to them their own power to rise and 
become whole. 

Yet He was not much concerned with Himself as a physician. He was rather 
preoccupied with the religion and the politics of this land. And this I regret, for 
first of all things we must needs be sound of body. 

But these Syrians, when they are visited by an illness, seek an argument rather 
than medicine. 

And pity it is that the greatest of all their physicians chose rather to be but a 
maker of speeches in the market-place. 


Simon, who was Called Peter 
When He and His Brother were Called 
2 = = C) 


I was on the shore of the Lake of Galilee when I first beheld Jesus my Lord and 
my Master. 

My brother Andrew was with me and we were casting out net into the waters. 

The waves were rough and high and we caught but few fish. And our hearts 
were heavy. 

Suddenly Jesus stood near us, as if He had taken form that very moment, for 
we had not seen Him approaching. 

He called us by our names, and He said, “If you will follow me I will lead you 
to an inlet where the fishes are swarming.” 

And as I looked at His face the net fell from my hands, for a flame kindled 
within me and I recognized Him. 

And my brother Andrew spoke and said, “We know all the inlets upon these 
shores, and we know also that on a windy day like this the fish seek a depth 
beyond our nets.” 

And Jesus answered, “Follow me to the shores of a greater sea. I shall make 
you fishers of men. And your net shall never be empty.” 

And we abandoned our boat and our net and followed Him. 

I myself was drawn by a power, viewless, that walked beside His person. 

I walked near Him, breathless and full of wonder, and my brother Andrew was 
behind us, bewildered and amazed. 

And as we walked on the sand I made bold and said unto Him, “Sir, I and my 
brother will follow your footsteps, and where you go we too will go. But if it 
please you to come to our house this night, we shall be graced by your visit. Our 
house is not large and our ceiling not high, and you will sit at but a frugal meal. 
Yet if you will abide in our hovel it will be to us a palace. And would you break 


bread with us, we in your presence were to be envied by the princes of the 
land.” 

And He said, “Yea, I will be your guest this night.” 

And I rejoiced in my heart. And we walked behind Him in silence until we 
reached our house. 

And as we stood at the threshold Jesus said, “Peace be to this house, and to 
those who dwell in it.” 

Then He entered and we followed Him. 

My wife and my wife’s mother and my daughter stood before Him and they 
worshipped Him; then they knelt before Him and kissed the hem of His sleeve. 

They were astonished that He, the chosen and the well beloved, had come to 
be our guest; for they had already seen Him by the River Jordan when John the 
Baptist had proclaimed Him before the people. 

And straightway my wife and my wife’s mother began to prepare the supper. 

My brother Andrew was a shy man, but his faith in Jesus was deeper than my 
faith. 

And my daughter, who was then but twelve year old, stood by Him and held 
His garment as if she were in fear He would leave us and go out again into the 
night. She clung to Him like a lost sheep that has found its shepherd. 

Then we sat at the board, and He broke the bread and poured the wine; and He 
turned to us saying, “My friends, grace me now in sharing this food with me, 
even as the Father has graced us in giving it unto us.” 

These words He said ere He touched a morsel, for He wished to follow an 
ancient custom that the honoured guest becomes the host. 

And as we sat with Him around the board we felt as if we were sitting at the 
feast of the great King. 

My daughter Petronelah, who was young and unknowing, gazed at His face 
and followed the movements of His hands. And I saw a veil of tears in her eyes. 

When He left the board we followed Him and sat about Him in the vine- 
arbour. 

And He spoke to us and we listened, and our hearts fluttered within us like 
birds. 

He spoke of the second birth of man, and of the opening of the gates of the 
heavens; and of angels descending and bringing peace and good cheer to all 
men, and of angels ascending to the throne bearing the longings of men to the 


Lord God. 

Then He looked into my eyes and gazed into the depths of my heart. And He 
said, “I have chosen you and your brother, and you must needs come with me. 
You have laboured and you have been heavy-laden. Now I shall give you rest. 
Take up my yoke and learn of me, for in my heart is peace, and your soul shall 
find abundance and a home-coming.” 

When He spoke thus I and my brother stood up before Him, and I said to Him, 
“Master, we will follow you to the ends of the earth. And if our burden were as 
heavy as the mountain we would bear it with you in gladness. And should we 
fall by the wayside we shall know that we have fallen on the way to heaven, and 
we shall be satisfied.” 

And my brother Andrew spoke and said, “Master, we would be threads 
between your hands and your loom. Weave us into the cloth if you will, for we 
would be in the raiment of the Most High.” 

And my wife raised her face, and the tears were upon her cheeks and she 
spoke with joy, and she said, “Blessed are you who come in the name of the 
Lord. Blessed is the womb that carried you, and the breast that gave you milk.” 

And my daughter, who was but twelve years old, sat at His feet and she nestled 
close to Him. 

And the mother of my wife, who sat at the threshold, said no word. She only 
wept in silence and her shawl was wet with her tears. 

Then Jesus walked over to her and He raised her face to His face and He said 
to her, “You are the mother of all these. You weep for joy, and I will keep your 
tears in my memory.” 

And now the old moon rose above the horizon. And Jesus gazed upon it for a 
moment, and then He turned to us and said, “It is late. Seek your beds, and may 
God visit your repose. I will be here in this arbour until dawn. I have cast my net 
this day and I have caught two men; I am satisfied, and now I bid you good- 
night.” 

Then my wife’s mother said, “But we have laid your bed in the house, I pray 
you enter and rest.” 

And He answered her saying, “I would indeed rest, but not under a roof. Suffer 
me to lie this night under the canopy of the grapes and the stars.” 

And she made haste and brought out the mattress and the pillows and the 
coverings. And He smiled at her and He said, “Behold, I shall lie down upon a 
bed twice made.” 


Then we left Him and entered into the house, and my daughter was the last one 
to enter. And her eyes were upon Him until I had closed the door. 


Thus for the first time I knew my Lord and Master. 
And though it was many years ago, it still seems but of today. 


Caiaphas 
The High Priest 
(2 = = C) 


In speaking of that man Jesus and of His death let us consider two salient facts: 
the Torah must needs be held in safety by us, and this kingdom must needs be 
protected by Rome. 

Now that man was defiant to us and to Rome. He poisoned the mind of the 
simple people, and He led them as if by magic against us and against Caesar. 

My own slaves, both men and women, after hearing him speak in the market- 
place, turned sullen and rebellious. Some of them left my house and escaped to 
the desert whence they came. 

Forget not that the Torah is our foundation and our tower of strength. No man 
shall undermine us while we have this power to restrain his hand, and no man 
shall overthrow Jerusalem so long as its walls stand upon the ancient stone that 
David laid. 

If the seed of Abraham is indeed to live and thrive this soil must remain 
undefiled. 

And that man Jesus was a defiler and a corrupter. We slew Him with a 
conscience both deliberate and clean. And we shall slay all those who would 
debase the laws of Moses or seek to befoul our sacred heritage. 

We and Pontius Pilatus knew the danger in that man, and that it was wise to 
bring Him to an end. 

I shall see that His followers come to the same end, and the echo of His words 
to the same silence. 

If Judea is to live all men who oppose her must be brought down to the dust. 
And ere Judea shall die I will cover my grey head with ashes even as did Samuel 
the prophet, and I will tear off this garment of Aaron and clothe me in sackcloth 
until I go hence forever. 


Joanna, the Wife of Herod’s Steward 
On Children 


») 4 


Seaser—S 2. 


Jesus was never married but He was a friend of women, and He knew them as 
they would be known in sweet comradeship. 

And He loved children as they would be loved in faith and understanding. 

In the light of His eyes there was a father and a brother and a son. 

He would hold a child upon His knees and say, “Of such is your might and 
your freedom; and of such is the kingdom of the spirit.” 

They say that Jesus heeded not the law of Moses, and that He was over- 
forgiving to the prostitutes of Jerusalem and the country side. 

I myself at that time was deemed a prostitute, for I loved a man who was not 
my husband, and he was a Sadducee. 

And on a day the Sadducees came upon me in my house when my lover was 
with me, and they seized me and held me, and my lover walked away and left 
me. 

Then they led me to the market-place where Jesus was teaching. 

It was their desire to hold me up before Him as a test and a trap for Him. 

But Jesus judged me not. He laid shame upon those who would have had me 
shamed, and He reproached them. 

And He bade me go my way. 

And after that all the tasteless fruit of life turned sweet to my mouth, and the 
scentless blossoms breathed fragrance into my nostrils. I became a woman 
without a tainted memory, and I was free, and my head was no longer bowed 
down. 


Rafca 
The Bride of Cana 
(2 = = C) 


This happened before He was known to the people. 

I was in my mother’s garden tending the rose-bushes, when He stopped at our 
gate. 

And He said, “I am thirsty. Will you give me water from your well?” 

And I ran and brought the silver cup, and filled it with water; and I poured into 
it a few drops from the jasmine vial. 

And He drank deep and was pleased. 

Then He looked into my eyes and said, “My blessing shall be upon you.” 

When He said that I felt as it were a gust of wind rushing through my body. 
And I was no longer shy; and I said, “Sir, I am betrothed to a man of Cana in 
Galilee. And I shall be married on the fourth day of the coming week. Will you 
not come to my wedding and grace my marriage with your presence?” 

And He answered, “I will come, my child.” 

Mind you, He said, “My child,” yet He was but a youth, and I was nearly 
twenty. 

Then He walked on down the road. 

And I stood at the gate of our garden until my mother called me into the 
house. 

On the fourth day of the following week I was taken to the house of my 
bridegroom and given in marriage. 

And Jesus came, and with Him His mother and His brother James. 

And they sat around the wedding-board with our guests whilst my maiden 
comrades sang the wedding-songs of Solomon the King. And Jesus ate our food 
and drank our wine and smiled upon me and upon the others. 

And He heeded all the songs of the lover bringing his beloved into his tent; 


and of the young vineyard-keeper who loved the daughter of the lord of the 
vineyard and led her to his mother’s house; and of the prince who met the beggar 
maiden and bore her to his realm and crowned her with the crown of his fathers. 

And it seemed as if He were listening to yet other songs also, which I could 
not hear. 

At sundown the father of my bridegroom came to the mother of Jesus and 
whispered saying, “We have no more wine for our guests. And the day is not yet 
over.” 

And Jesus heard the whispering, and He said, “The cup bearer knows that 
there is still more wine.” 

And so it was indeed—and as long as the guests remained there was fine wine 
for all who would drink. 

Presently Jesus began to speak with us. He spoke of the wonders of earth and 
heaven; of sky flowers that bloom when night is upon the earth, and of earth 
flowers that blossom when the day hides the stars. 

And He told us stories and parables, and His voice enchanted us so that we 
gazed upon Him as if seeing visions, and we forgot the cup and the plate. 

And as I listened to Him it seemed as if I were in a land distant and unknown. 

After a while one of the guests said to the father of my bridegroom, “You have 
kept the best wine till the end of the feast. Other hosts do not so.” 

And all believed that Jesus had wrought a miracle, that they should have more 
wine and better at the end of the wedding-feast than at the beginning. 

I too thought that Jesus had poured the wine, but I was not astonished; for in 
His voice I had already listened to miracles. 

And afterwards indeed, His voice remained close to my heart, even until I had 
been delivered of my first-born child. 

And now even to this day in our village and in the villages nearby, the word of 
our guest is still remembered. And they say, “The spirit of Jesus of Nazareth is 
the best and the oldest wine.” 


A Persian Philosopher in Damascus 
Of Ancient Gods and New 
2 = = C) 


I cannot tell the fate of this man, nor can I say what shall befall His disciples. 

A seed hidden in the heart of an apple is an orchard invisible. Yet should that 
seed fall upon a rock, it will come to naught. 

But this I say: The ancient God of Israel is harsh and relentless. Israel should 
have another God; one who is gentle and forgiving, who would look down upon 
them with pity; one who would descend with the rays of the sun and walk on the 
path of their limitations, rather than sit for ever in the judgment seat to weigh 
their faults and measure their wrong-doings. 

Israel should bring forth a God whose heart is not a jealous heart, and whose 
memory of their shortcomings is brief; one who would not avenge Himself upon 
them even to the third and the fourth generation. 

Man here in Syria is like man in all lands. He would look into the mirror of his 
own understanding and therein find his deity. He would fashion the gods after 
his own likeness, and worship that which reflects his own image. 

In truth man prays to his deeper longing, that it may rise and fulfil the sum of 
his desires. 

There is no depth beyond the soul of man, and the soul is the deep that calls 
unto itself; for there is no other voice to speak and there are no other ears to 
hear. 

Even we in Persia would see our faces in the disc of the sun and our bodies 
dancing in the fire that we kindle upon the altars. 

Now the God of Jesus, whom He called Father, would not be a stranger unto 
the people of Jesus, and He would fulfil their desires. 

The gods of Egypt have cast off their burden of stones and fled to the Nubian 
desert, to be free among those who are still free from knowing. 


The gods of Greece and Rome are vanishing into their own sunset. They were 
too much like men to live in the ecstasy of men. The groves in which their magic 
was bor have been cut down by the axes of the Athenians and the 
Alexandrians. 

And in this land also the high places are made low by the lawyers of Beirut 
and the young hermits of Antioch. 

Only the old women and the weary men seek the temples of their forefathers; 
only the exhausted at the end of the road seek its beginning. 

But this man Jesus, this Nazarene, He has spoken of a God too vast to be 
unlike the soul of any man, too knowing to punish, too loving to remember the 
sins of His creatures. And this God of the Nazarene shall pass over the threshold 
of the children of the earth, and He shall sit at their hearth, and He shall be a 
blessing within their walls and a light upon their path. 

But my God is the God of Zoroaster, the God who is the sun in the sky and fire 
upon the earth and light in the bosom of man. And I am content. I need no other 
God. 


David, One of His Followers 


Jesus the Practical 


? C 


Sasser—S 2. 


I did not know the meaning of His discourses or His parables until He was no 
longer among us. Nay, I did not understand until His words took living forms 
before my eyes and fashioned themselves into bodies that walk in the procession 
of my own day. 

Let me tell you this: On a night as I sat in my house pondering, and 
remembering His words and His deeds that I might inscribe them in a book, 
three thieves entered my house. And though I knew they came to rob me of my 
goods, I was too mindful of what I was doing to meet them with the sword, or 
even to say, “What do you here?” 

But I continued writing my remembrances of the Master. 

And when the thieves had gone then I remembered His saying, “He who 
would take your cloak, let him take your other cloak also.” 

And I understood. 

As I sat recording His words no man could have stopped me even were he to 
have carried away all my possessions. 

For though I would guard my possessions and also my person, I know there 
lies the greater treasure. 


Luke 
On Hypocrites 
(2 = = C) 


Jesus despised and scorned the hypocrites, and His wrath was like a tempest that 
scourged them. His voice was thunder in their ears and He cowed them. 

In their fear of Him they sought His death; and like moles in the dark earth 
they worked to undermine His footsteps. But He fell not into their snares. 

He laughed at them, for well He knew that the spirit shall not be mocked, nor 
shall it be taken in the pitfall. 

He held a mirror in His hand and therein He saw the sluggard and the limping 
and those who stagger and fall by the roadside on the way to the summit. 

And He pitied them all. He would even have raised them to His stature and He 
would have carried their burden. Nay, He would have bid their weakness lean on 
His strength. 

He did not utterly condemn the liar or the thief or the murderer, but He did 
utterly condemn the hypocrite whose face is masked and whose hand is gloved. 

Often I have pondered on the heart that shelters all who come from the 
wasteland to its sanctuary, yet against the hypocrite is closed and sealed. 

On a day as we rested with Him in the Garden of Pomegranates, I said to Him, 
“Master, you forgive and console the sinner and all the weak and the infirm save 
only the hypocrite alone.” 

And He said, “You have chosen your words well when you called the sinners 
weak and infirm. I do forgive them their weakness of body and their infirmity of 
spirit. For their failings have been laid upon them by their forefathers, or by the 
greed of their neighbours. 

“But I tolerate not the hypocrite, because he himself lays a yoke upon the 
guileless and the yielding. 

“Weaklings, whom you call sinners, are like the featherless young that fall 


from the nest. The hypocrite is the vulture waiting upon a rock for the death of 
the prey. 

“Weaklings are men lost in a desert. But the hypocrite is not lost. He knows 
the way yet he laughs between the sand and the wind. 

“For this cause I do not receive him.” 

Thus our Master spoke, and I did not understand. But I understand now. 

Then the hypocrites of the land laid hands upon Him and they judged Him; 
and in so doing they deemed themselves justified. For they cited the law of 
Moses in the Sanhedrim in witness and evidence against Him. 

And they who break the law at the rise of every dawn and break it again at 
sunset, brought about His death. 


Matthew 
The Sermon on the Mount 
(> = = C) 


One harvest day Jesus called us and His other friends to the hills. The earth was 
fragrant, and like the daughter of a king at her wedding-feast, she wore all her 
jewels. And the sky was her bridegroom. 


When we reached the heights Jesus stood still in the grove of the laurels, and 
He said, “Rest here, quiet your mind and tune your heart, for I have much to tell 
you.” 


Then we reclined on the grass, and the summer flowers were all about us, and 
Jesus sat in our midst. 

And Jesus said: 

“Blessed are the serene in spirit. 

“Blessed are they who are not held by possessions, for they shall be free. 

“Blessed are they who remember their pain, and in their pain await their joy. 

“Blessed are they who hunger after truth and beauty, for their hunger shall 
bring bread, and their thirst cool water. 

“Blessed are the kindly, for they shall be consoled by their own kindliness. 

“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall be one with God. 

“Blessed are the merciful, for mercy shall be in their portion. 

“Blessed are the peacemakers, for their spirit shall dwell above the battle, and 
they shall turn the potter’s field into a garden. 

“Blessed are they who are hunted, for they shall be swift of foot and they shall 
be winged. 

“Rejoice and be joyful, for you have found the kingdom of heaven within you. 
The singers of old were persecuted when they sang of that kingdom. You too 
shall be persecuted, and therein lies your honour, therein your reward. 


“You are the salt of the earth; should the salt lose its savour wherewith shall 


the food of man’s heart be salted? 

“You are the light of the world. Put not that light under a bushel. Let it shine 
rather from the summit, to those who seek the City of God. 

“Think not I came to destroy the laws of the scribes and the Pharisees; for my 
days among you are numbered and my words are counted, and I have but hours 
in which to fulfil another law and reveal a new covenant. 

“You have been told that you shall not kill, but I say unto you, you shall not be 
angry without a cause. 

“You have been charged by the ancients to bring your calf and your lamb and 
your dove to the temple, and to slay them upon the altar, that the nostrils of God 
may feed upon the odour of their fat, and that you may be forgiven your 
failings. 

“But I say unto you, would you give God that which was His own from the 
beginning; and would you appease Him whose throne is above the silent deep 
and whose arms encircle space? 

“Rather, seek out your brother and be reconciled unto him ere you seek the 
temple; and be a loving giver unto your neighbour. For in the soul of these God 
has builded a temple that shall not be destroyed, and in their heart He has raised 
an altar that shall never perish. 

“You have been told, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto 
you: Resist not evil, for resistance is food unto evil and makes it strong. And 
only the weak would revenge themselves. The strong of soul forgive, and it is 
honour in the injured to forgive. 

“Only the fruitful tree is shaken or stoned for food. 

“Be not heedful of the morrow, but rather gaze upon today, for sufficient for 
today is the miracle thereof. 

“Be not over-mindful of yourself when you give but be mindful of the 
necessity. For every giver himself receives from the Father, and that much more 
abundantly. 

“And give to each according to his need; for the Father gives not salt to the 
thirsty, nor a stone to the hungry, nor milk to the weaned. 

“And give not that which is holy to dogs; nor cast your pearls before swine. 
For with such gifts you mock them; and they also shall mock your gift, and in 
their hate would fain destroy you. 

“Lay not up for yourselves treasures that corrupt or that thieves may steal 


away. Lay up rather treasure which shall not corrupt or be stolen, and whose 
loveliness increases when many eyes behold it. For where your treasure is, your 
heart is also. 

“You have been told that the murderer shall be put to the sword, that the thief 
shall be crucified, and the harlot stoned. But I say unto you that you are not free 
from wrongdoing of the murderer and the thief and the harlot, and when they are 
punished in the body your own spirit is darkened. 

“Verily no crime is committed by one man or one woman. All crimes are 
committed by all. And he who pays the penalty may be breaking a link in the 
chain that hangs upon your own ankles. Perhaps he is paying with his sorrow the 
price for your passing joy.” 

Thus spake Jesus, and it was in my desire to kneel down and worship Him, yet 
in my shyness I could not move nor speak a word. 

But at last I spoke; and I said, “I would pray this moment, yet my tongue is 
heavy. Teach me to pray.” 

And Jesus said, “When you would pray, let your longing pronounce the words. 
It is in my longing now to pray thus: 

“Our Father in earth and heaven, sacred is Thy name. 

Thy will be done with us, even as in space. 

Give us of Thy bread sufficient for the day. 

In Thy compassion forgive us and enlarge us to forgive one another. 

Guide us towards Thee and stretch down Thy hand to us in darkness. 

For Thine is the kingdom, and in Thee is our power and our fulfilment.” 


And it was now evening, and Jesus walked down from the hills, and all of us 
followed Him. And as I followed I was repeating His prayer, and remembering 
all that He had said; for I knew that the words that had fallen like flakes that day 
must set and grow firm like crystals, and that wings that had fluttered above our 
heads were to beat the earth like iron hoofs. 


John, the Son of Zebedee 
On the Various Appellations of Jesus 
2 = = C) 


You have remarked that some of us call Jesus the Christ, and some the Word, and 
others call Him the Nazarene, and still others the Son of Man. 

I will try to make these names clear in the light that is given me. 

The Christ, He who was in the ancient of days, is the flame of God that dwells 
in the spirit of man. He is the breath of life that visits us, and takes unto Himself 
a body like our bodies. 

He is the will of the Lord. 

He is the first Word, which would speak with our voice and live in our ear that 
we may heed and understand. 

And the Word of the Lord our God builded a house of flesh and bones, and 
was man like unto you and myself. 

For we could not hear the song of the bodiless wind nor see our greater self 
walking in the mist. 

Many times the Christ has come to the world, and He has walked many lands. 
And always He has been deemed a stranger and a madman. 

Yet the sound of His voice descended never to emptiness, for the memory of 
man keeps that which his mind takes no care to keep. 

This is the Christ, the innermost and the height, who walks with man towards 
eternity. 

Have you not heard of Him at the cross-roads of India? And in the land of the 
Magi, and upon the sands of Egypt? 

And here in your North Country your bards of old sang of Prometheus, the 
fire-bringer, he who was the desire of man fulfilled, the caged hope made free; 
and Orpheus, who came with a voice and a lyre to quicken the spirit in beast and 
man. 


And know you not of Mithra the king, and of Zoroaster the prophet of the 
Persians, who woke from man’s ancient sleep and stood at the bed of our 
dreaming? 

We ourselves become man anointed when we meet in the Temple Invisible, 
once every thousand years. Then comes one forth embodied, and at His coming 
our silence turns to singing. 

Yet our ears turn not always to listening nor our eyes to seeing. 

Jesus the Nazarene was born and reared like ourselves; His mother and father 
were like our parents, and He was a man. 

But the Christ, the Word, who was in the beginning, the Spirit who would have 
us live our fuller life, came unto Jesus and was with Him. 

And the Spirit was the versed hand of the Lord, and Jesus was the harp. 

The Spirit was the psalm, and Jesus was the turn thereof. 

And Jesus, the Man of Nazareth, was the host and the mouthpiece of the 
Christ, who walked with us in the sun and who called us His friends. 

In those days the hills of Galilee and her valleys heard but His voice. And I 
was a youth then, and trod in His path and pursued His footprints. 

I pursued His footprints and trod in His path, to hear the words of the Christ 
from the lips of Jesus of Galilee. 

mK OK OK 
Now you would know why some of us call Him the Son of Man. 

He Himself desired to be called by that name, for He knew the hunger and the 
thirst of man, and He beheld man seeking after His greater self. 

The Son of Man was Christ the Gracious, who would be with us all. 

He was Jesus the Nazarene who would lead His brothers to the Anointed One, 
even to the Word which was in the beginning with God. 

In my heart dwells Jesus of Galilee, the Man above men, the Poet who makes 
poets of us all, the Spirit who knocks at our door that we may wake and rise and 
walk out to meet truth naked and unencumbered. 


A Young Priest of Capernaum 
Of Jesus the Magician 
2 = = C) 


He was a magician, warp and woof, and a sorcerer, a man who bewildered the 
simple by charms and incantations. And He juggled with the words of our 
prophets and with the sanctities of our forefathers. 

Aye, He even bade the dead be His witnesses, and the voiceless graves His 
forerunners and authority. 

He sought the women of Jerusalem and the women of the countryside with the 
cunning of the spider that seeks the fly; and they were caught in His web. 

For women are weak and empty-headed, and they follow the man who would 
comfort their unspent passion with soft and tender words. Were it not for these 
women, infirm and possessed by His evil spirit, His name would have been 
erased from the memory of man. 

And who were the men who followed Him? 

They were of the horde that are yoked and trodden down. In their ignorance 
and fear they would never have rebelled against their rightful masters. But when 
He promised them high stations in His kingdom of mirage, they yielded to His 
fantasy as clay to the potter. 

Know you not, the slave in his dreaming would always be master; and the 
weakling would be a lion? 

The Galilean was a conjuror and a deceiver, a man who forgave the sins of all 
sinners that He might hear Hail and Hosanna from their unclean mouths; and 
who fed the faint heart of the hopeless and the wretched that He might have ears 
for His voice and a retinue at His command. 

He broke the Sabbath with those who break that He might gain the support of 
the lawless; and He spoke ill of our high priests that He might win attention in 
Sanhedrim, and by opposition increase His fame. 


I have said often that I hated that man. Ay, I hate Him more than I hate the 
Romans who govern our country. Even His coming was from Nazareth, a town 
cursed by our prophets, a dunghill of the Gentiles, from which no good shall 
ever proceed. 


A Rich Levi in the Neighbourhood of Nazareth 


Jesus the Good Carpenter 


») C 


Sasser—S 2. 


He was a good carpenter. The doors He fashioned were never unlocked by 
thieves, and the windows he made were always ready to open to the east wind 
and to the west. 

And He made chests of cedar wood, polished and enduring, and ploughs and 
pitchforks strong and yielding to the hand. 

And He carved lecterns for our synagogues. He carved them out of the golden 
mulberry; and on both sides of the support, where the sacred book lies, He 
chiselled wings outspreading; and under the support, heads of bulls and doves, 
and large-eyed deer. 

All this He wrought in the manner of the Chaldeans and the Greeks. But there 
was that in His skill which was neither Chaldean nor Greek. 

Now this my house was builded by many hands thirty years ago. I sought 
builders and carpenters in all the towns of Galilee. They had each the skill and 
the art of building, and I was pleased and satisfied with all that they did. 

But come now, and behold two doors and a window that were fashioned by 
Jesus of Nazareth. They in their stability mock at all else in my house. 

See you not that these two doors are different from all other doors? And this 
window opening to the east, is it not different from other windows? 

All my doors and windows are yielding to the years save these which He 
made. They alone stand strong against the elements. 

And see those cross-beams, how he placed them; and these nails, how they are 
driven from one side of the board, and then caught and fastened so firmly upon 
the other side. 

And what is passing strange is that that labourer who was worthy the wages of 
two men received but the wage of one man; and that same labourer now is 


deemed a prophet in Israel. 

Had I known then that this youth with saw and plane was a prophet, I would 
have begged Him to speak rather than work, and then I would have overpaid 
Him for his words. 

And now I still have many men working in my house and fields. How shall I 
know the man whose own hand is upon his tool, from the man upon whose hand 
God lays His hand? 

Yea, how shall I know God’s hand? 


A Shepherd in South Lebanon 
A Parable 
2 = = C) 


It was late summer when He and three other men first walked upon that road 
yonder. It was evening, and He stopped and stood there at the end of the pasture. 

I was playing upon my flute, and my flock was grazing all around me. When 
He stopped I rose and walked over and stood before Him. 

And He asked me, “Where is the grave of Elijah? Is it not somewhere near this 
place?” 

And I answered Him, “It is there, Sir, underneath that great heap of stones. 
Even unto this day every passer-by brings a stone and places it upon the heap.” 

And He thanked me and walked away, and His friends walked behind Him. 

And after three days Ganaliel who was also a shepherd, said to me that the 
man who had passed by was a prophet in Judea; but I did not believe him. Yet I 
thought of that man for many a moon. 

When spring came Jesus passed once more by this pasture, and this time He 
was alone. 

I was not playing on my flute that day for I had lost a sheep and I was 
bereaved, and my heart was downcast within me. 

And I walked towards Him and stood still before Him, for I desired to be 
comforted. 

And He looked at me and said, “You do not play upon your flute this day. 
Whence is the sorrow in your eyes?” 

And I answered, “A sheep from among my sheep is lost. I have sought her 
everywhere but I find her not. And I know not what to do.” 

And He was silent for a moment. Then He smiled upon me and said, “Wait 
here awhile and I will find your sheep.” And He walked away and disappeared 
among the hills. 


After an hour He returned, and my sheep was close behind Him. And as He 
stood before me, the sheep looked up into His face even as I was looking. Then I 
embraced her inn gladness. 

And He put His hand upon my shoulder and said, “From this day you shall 
love this sheep more than any other in your flock, for she was lost and now she 
is found.” 

And again I embraced my sheep in gladness, and she came close to me, and I 
was silent. 

But when I raised my head to thank Jesus, He was already walking afar off, 
and I had not the courage to follow Him. 


John the Baptist 
He Speaks in Prison to His Disciples 
(2 = = C) 


I am not silent in this foul hole while the voice of Jesus is heard on the 
battlefield. I am not to be held nor confined while He is free. 

They tell me the vipers are coiling round His loins, but I answer: The vipers 
shall awaken His strength, and He shall crush them with His heel. 

I am only the thunder of His lightning. Though I spoke first, His was the word 
and the purpose. 

They caught me unwarned. Perhaps they will lay hands on Him also. Yet not 
before He has pronounced His word in full. And He shall overcome them. 

His chariot shall pass over them, and the hoofs of His horses shall trample 
them, and He shall be triumphant. 

They shall go forth with lance and sword, but He shall meet them with the 
power of the Spirit. 

His blood shall run upon the earth, but they themselves shall know the wounds 
and the pain thereof, and they shall be baptized in their tears until they are 
cleansed of their sins. 

Their legions shall march towards His cities with rams of iron, but on their 
way they shall be drowned in the River Jordan. 

And His walls and His towers shall rise higher, and the shields of His warriors 
shall shine brighter in the sun. 

They say I am in league with Him, and that our design is to urge the people to 
rise and revolt against the kingdom of Judea. 

I answer, and would that I had flames for words: if they deem this pit of 
iniquity a kingdom, let it fall into destruction and be no more. Let it go the way 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and let this race be forgotten by God, and this land be 
turned to ashes. 


Aye, behind these prison walls I am indeed an ally to Jesus of Nazareth, and 
He shall lead my armies, horse and foot. And I myself, though a captain, am not 
worthy to loose the strings of His sandals. 

Go to Him and repeat my words, and then in my name beg Him for comfort 
and blessing. 

I shall not be here long. At night ‘twixt waking and waking I feel slow feet 
with measured steps treading above this body. And when I hearken, I hear the 
rain falling upon my grave. 

Go to Jesus, and say that John of Kedron whose soul is filled with shadows 
and then emptied again, prays for Him, while the grave-digger stands close by, 
and the swordman outstretches his hand for his wages. 


Joseph of Arimathea 
On the Primal Aims of Jesus 
2 = = C) 


You would know the primal aim of Jesus, and I would fain tell you. But none can 
touch with fingers the life of the blessed wine, nor see the sap that feeds the 
branches. 

And though I have eaten of the grapes and have tasted the new vintage at the 
winepress, I cannot tell you all. 

I can only relate what I know of Him. 

Our Master and our Beloved lived but three prophet’s seasons. They were the 
spring of His song, the summer of His ecstasy, and the autumn of His passion; 
and each season was a thousand years. 

The spring of His song was spent in Galilee. It was there that He gathered His 
lovers about Him, and it was on the shores of the blue lake that He first spoke of 
the Father, and of our release and our freedom. 

By the Lake of Galilee we lost ourselves to find our way to the Father; and oh, 
the little loss that turned to such gain. 

It was there the angels sang in our ears and bade us leave the arid land for the 
garden of heart’s desire. 

He spoke of fields and green pastures; of the slopes of Lebanon where the 
white lilies are heedless of the caravans passing in the dust of the valley. 

He spoke of the wild brier that smiles in the sun and yields its incense to the 
passing breeze. 

And He would say, “The lilies and the brier live but a day, yet that day is 
eternity spent in freedom.” 

And one evening as we sat beside the stream He said, “Behold the brook and 
listen to its music. Forever shall it seek the sea, and though it is forever seeking, 
it sings its mystery from noon to noon. 


“Would that you seek the Father as the brook seeks the sea.” 

Then came the summer of His ecstasy, and the June of His love was upon us. 
He spoke of naught then but the other man—the neighbour, the road-fellow, the 
stranger, and our childhood’s playmates. 

He spoke of the traveller journeying from the east to Egypt, of the ploughman 
coming home with his oxen at eventide, of the chance guest led by dusk to our 
door. 

And He would say, “Your neighbour is your unknown self made visible. His 
face shall be reflected in your still waters, and if you gaze therein you shall 
behold your own countenance. 

“Should you listen in the night, you shall hear him speak, and his words shall 
be the throbbing of your own heart. 

“Be unto him that which you would have him be unto you. 

“This is my law, and I shall say it unto you, and unto your children, and they 
unto their children until time is spent and generations are no more.” 

And on another day He said, “You shall not be yourself alone. You are in the 
deeds of other men, and they though unknowing are with you all your days. 

“They shall not commit a crime and your hand not be with their hand. 

“They shall not fall down but that you shall also fall down; and they shall not 
rise but that you shall rise with them. 

“Their road to the sanctuary is your road, and when they seek the wasteland 
you too seek with them. 

“You and your neighbour are two seeds sown in the field. Together you grow 
and together you shall sway in the wind. And neither of you shall claim the field. 
For a seed on its way to growth claims not even its own ecstasy. 

“Today I am with you. Tomorrow I go westward; but ere I go, I say unto you 
that your neighbour is your unknown self made visible. Seek him in love that 
you may know yourself, for only in that knowledge shall you become my 
brothers.” 


mK OK OK 
Then came the autumn of His passion. 
And He spoke to us of freedom, even as He had spoken in Galilee in the spring 
of His song; but now His words sought our deeper understanding. 
He spoke of leaves that sing only when blown upon the wind; and of man as a 
cup filled by the ministering angel of the day to quench the thirst of another 


angel. Yet whether that cup is full or empty it shall stand crystalline upon the 
board of the Most High. 

He said, “You are the cup and you are the wine. Drink yourselves to the dregs; 
or else remember me and you shall be quenched.” 

And on our way to the southward He said, “Jerusalem, which stands in pride 
upon the height, shall descend to the depth of Jahannum the dark valley, and in 
the midst of her desolation I shall stand alone. 

“The temple shall fall to dust, and around the portico you shall hear the cry of 
widows and orphans; and men in their haste to escape shall not know the faces 
of their brothers, for fear shall be upon them all. 

“But even there, if two of you shall meet and utter my name and look to the 
west, you Shall see me, and these my words shall again visit your ears.” 

And when we reached the hill of Bethany, He said, “Let us go to Jerusalem. 
The city awaits us. I will enter the gate riding upon a colt, and I will speak to the 
multitude. 

“Many are there who would chain me, and many who would put out my flame, 
but in my death you shall find life and you shall be free. 

“They shall seek the breath that hovers betwixt heart and mind as the swallow 
hovers between the field and his nest. But my breath has already escaped them, 
and they shall not overcome me. 

“The walls that my Father has built around me shall not fall down, and the acre 
He has made holy shall not be profaned. 

“When the dawn shall come, the sun will crown my head and I shall be with 
you to face the day. And that day shall be long, and the world shall not see its 
eventide. 

“The scribes and the Pharisees say the earth is thirsty for my blood. I would 
quench the thirst of the earth with my blood. But the drops shall rise oak trees 
and maple, and the east shall carry the acorns to other lands.” 

And then He said, “Judea would have a king, and she would march against the 
legions of Rome. 

“T shall not be her king. The diadems of Zion were fashioned for lesser brows. 
And the ring of Solomon is small for this finger. 

“Behold my hand. See you not that it is over-strong to hold a sceptre, and 
over-sinewed to wield a common sword? 

“Nay, I shall not command Syrian flesh against Roman. But you with my 


words shall wake that city, and my spirit shall speak to her second dawn. 
“My words shall be an invisible army with horses and chariots, and without 
axe or spear I shall conquer the priests of Jerusalem, and the Caesars. 


“T shall not sit upon a throne where slaves have sat and ruled other slaves. Nor 
will I rebel against the sons of Italy. 

“But I shall be a tempest in their sky, and a song in their soul. 

“And I shall be remembered. 

“They shall call me Jesus the Anointed.” 

These things He said outside the walls of Jerusalem before He entered the 
city. 

And His words are graven as with chisels. 


Nathaniel 
Jesus was not Meek 
(> = = C) 


They say that Jesus of Nazareth was humble and meek. 

They say that though He was a just man and righteous, He was a weakling, 
and was often confounded by the strong and the powerful; and that when He 
stood before men of authority He was but a lamb among lions. 

But I say Jesus had authority over men, and that He knew His power and 
proclaimed it among the hills of Galilee, and in the cities of Judea and 
Phoenicia. 

What man yielding and soft would say, “I am life, and I am the way to truth’? 

What man meek and lowly would say, “I am in God, our Father; and our God, 
the Father, is in me”? 

What man unmindful of His own strength would say, “He who believes not in 
me believes not in this life nor in the life everlasting”? 

What man uncertain of tomorrow would proclaim, “Your world shall pass 
away and be naught but scattered ashes were my words shall pass away”? 

Was He doubtful of Himself when He said to those who would confound Him 
with a harlot, “He who is without sin, let him cast a stone”? 

Did He fear authority when He drove the money-changers from the court of 
the temple, though they were licensed by the priests? 

Were His wings shorn when He cried aloud, “My kingdom is above your 
earthly kingdoms”? 

Was He seeking shelter in words when He repeated again and yet again, 
“Destroy this temple and I will rebuild it in three days”? 

Was it a coward who shook His hand in the face of the authorities and 
pronounced them “liars, low, filthy, and degenerate”? 

Shall a man bold enough to say these things to those who ruled Judea be 


deemed meek and humble? 

Nay. The eagle builds not his nest in the weeping willow. And the lion seeks 
not his den among the ferns. 

I am sickened and the bowels within me stir and rise when I hear the faint- 
hearted call Jesus humble and meek, that they may justify their own faint- 
heartedness; and when the downtrodden, for comfort and companionship, speak 
of Jesus as a worm shining by their side. 

Yea, my heart is sickened by such men. It is the mighty hunter I would preach, 
and the mountainous spirit unconquerable. 


Saba of Antioch 


On Saul of Tarsus 
(> = = C) 


This day I heard Saul of Tarsus preaching the Christ unto the Jews of this city. 

He calls himself Paul now, the apostle to the Gentiles. 

I knew him in my youth, and in those days he persecuted the friends of the 
Nazarene. Well do I remember his satisfaction when his fellows stoned the 
radiant youth called Stephen. 

This Paul is indeed a strange man. His souls is not the soul of a free man. 

At times he seems like an animal in the forest, hunted and wounded, seeking a 
cave wherein he would hide his pain from the world. 

He speaks not of Jesus, nor does he repeat His words. He preaches the 
Messiah whom the prophets of old had foretold. 

And though he himself is a learned Jew he addresses his fellow Jews in Greek; 
and his Greek is halting, and he ill chooses his words. 

But he is a man of hidden powers and his presence is affirmed by those who 
gather around him. And at times he assures them of what he himself is not 


assured. 
ok OK OOK 


We who knew Jesus and heard his discourses say that He taught man how to 
break the chains of his bondage that he might be free from his yesterdays. 

But Paul is forging chains for the man of tomorrow. He would strike with his 
own hammer upon the anvil in the name of one whom he does not know. 

The Nazarene would have us live the hour in passion and ecstasy. 

The man of Tarsus would have us be mindful of laws recorded in the ancient 
books. 

Jesus gave His breath to the breathless dead. And in my lone nights I believe 
and I understand. 


When He sat at the board, He told stories that gave happiness to the feasters, 
and spiced with His joy the meat and the wine. 

But Paul would prescribe our loaf and our cup. 

Suffer me not to turn my eyes the other way. 


Salome to a Woman Friend 
A Desire Unfulfilled 


> C 


Seasser—S 2. 


He was like poplars shimmering in the sun; 
And like a lake among the lonely hills, 
Shining in the sun; 

And like snow upon the mountain heights, 
White, white in the sun. 


Yea, He was like unto all these, 

And I loved Him. 

Yet I feared His presence. 

And my feet would not carry my burden of love 
That I might girdle His feet with my arms. 


I would have said to Him, 

“T have slain your friend in an hour of passion. 
Will you forgive me my sin? 

And will you not in mercy release my youth 
From its blind deed, 

That it may walk in your light?” 


I know He would have forgiven my dancing 

For the saintly head of His friend. 

I know He would have seen in me 

An object of His own teaching. 

For there was no valley of hunger He could not bridge, 


And no desert of thirst He could not cross. 


Yea, He was even as the poplars, 

And as the lakes among the hills, 

And like snow upon Lebanon. 

And I would have cooled my lips in the folds of His garment. 


But He was far from me, 

And I was ashamed. 

And my mother held me back 

When the desire to seek Him was upon me. 


Whenever He passed by, my heart ached for his loveliness, 
But my mother frowned at Him in contempt, 

And would hasten me from the window 

To my bedchamber. 

And she would cry aloud saying, 

“Who is He but another locust-eater from the desert? 


What is He but a scoffer and a renegade, 

A seditious riot-monger, who would rob us of sceptre and crown, 
And bid the foxes and the jackals of His accursed land 

Howl in our halls and sit upon our throne? 

Go hide your face from this day, 

And await the day when His head shall fall down, 

But not upon your platter.” 


These things my mother said. 

But my heart would not keep her words. 
I loved Him in secret, 

And my sleep was girdled with flames. 


He is gone now. 


And something that was in me is gone also. 
Perhaps it was my youth 

That would not tarry here, 

Since the God of youth was slain. 


Rachael, a Woman Disciple 
On Jesus the Vision and the Man 
2 = = C) 


I often wonder whether Jesus was a man of flesh and blood like ourselves, or a 
thought without a body, in the mind, or an idea that visits the vision of man. 

Often it seems to me that He was but a dream dreamed by the countless men 
and women at the same time in a sleep deeper than sleep and a dawn more 
serene than all dawns. 

And it seems that in relating the dream, the one to the other, we began to deem 
it a reality that had indeed come to pass; and in giving it body of our fancy and a 
voice of our longing we made it a substance of our own substance. 

But in truth He was not a dream. We knew Him for three years and beheld 
Him with our open eyes in the high tide of noon. 

We touched His hands, and we followed Him from one place to another. We 
heard His discourses and witnessed His deeds. Think you that we were a thought 
seeking after more thought, or a dream in the region of dreams? 

Great events always seem alien to our daily lives, though their nature may be 
rooted in our nature. But though they appear sudden in their coming and sudden 
in their passing, their true span is for years and for generations. 

Jesus of Nazareth was Himself the Great Event. That man whose father and 
mother and brothers we know, was Himself a miracle wrought in Judea. Yea, all 
His own miracles, if placed at His feet, would not rise to the height of His 
ankles. 

And all the rivers of all the years shall not carry away our remembrance of 
Him. 

He was a mountain burning in the night, yet He was a soft glow beyond the 
hills. He was a tempest in the sky, yet He was a murmur in the mist of daybreak. 

He was a torrent pouring from the heights to the plains to destroy all things in 


its path. And He was like the laughter of children. 

Every year I had waited for spring to visit this valley. I had waited for the lilies 
and the cyclamen, and then every year my soul had been saddened within me; 
forever I longed to rejoice with the spring, yet I could not. 

But when Jesus came to my seasons He was indeed a spring, and in Him was 
the promise of all the years to come. He filled my heart with joy; and like the 
violets I grew, a shy thing, in the light of His coming. 

And now the changing seasons of worlds not yet ours shall not erase His 
loveliness from this our world. 

Nay, Jesus was not a phantom, nor a conception of the poets. He was man like 
yourself and myself. But only to sight and touch and hearing; in all other ways 
He was unlike us. 

He was a man of joy; and it was upon the path of joy that He met the sorrows 
of all men. And it was from the high roofs of His sorrows that He beheld the joy 
of all men. 

He saw visions that we did not see, and heard voices that we did not hear; and 
He spoke as if to invisible multitudes, and oft times He spoke through us to races 
yet unborn. 

And Jesus was often alone. He was among us yet not one with us. He was 
upon the earth, yet He was of the sky. And only in our aloneness may we visit 
the land of His aloneness. 

He loved us with tender love. His heart was a winepress. You and I could 
approach with a cup and drink there from. 

One thing I did not use to understand in Jesus: He would make merry with His 
listeners; He would tell jests and play upon words, and laugh with all the fullness 
of His heart, even when there were distances in His eyes and sadness in His 
voice. But I understand now. 

I often think of the earth as a woman heavy with her first child. When Jesus 
was born, He was the first child. And when He died, He was the first man to die. 

For did it not appear to you that the earth was stilled on that dark Friday, and 
the heavens were at war with the heavens? 

And felt you not when His face disappeared from our sight as if we were 
naught but memories in the mist? 


Cleopas of Bethroune 
On the Law and the Prophets 
2 = = C) 


When Jesus spoke the whole world was hushed to listen. His words were not for 
our ears but rather for the elements of which God made this earth. 

He spoke to the sea, our vast mother, that gave us birth. He spoke to the 
mountain, our elder brother whose summit is a promise. 

And He spoke to the angels beyond the sea and the mountain to whom we 
entrusted our dreams ere the clay in us was made hard in the sun. 

And still His speech slumbers within our breast like a love-song half forgotten, 
and sometimes it burns itself through to our memory. 

His speech was simple and joyous, and the sound of His voice was like cool 
water in a land of drought. 

Once He raised His hand against the sky, and His fingers were like the 
branches of a sycamore tree; and He said with a great voice: 

“The prophets of old have spoken to you, and your ears are filled with their 
speech. But I say unto you, empty your ears of what you have heard.” 

And these words of Jesus, “But I say unto you,” were not uttered by a man of 
our race nor of our world; but rather by a host of seraphim marching across the 
sky of Judea. 

Again and yet again He would quote the law and the prophets, and then he 
would say, “But I say unto you.” 

Oh, what burning words, what waves of seas unknown to the shores of our 
mind, “But I say unto you.” 

What stars seeking the darkness of the soul, and what sleepless souls awaiting 


the dawn. 
oK OK OOK 


To tell of the speech of Jesus one must needs have His speech or the echo 


thereof. 
I have neither the speech nor the echo. 


I beg you to forgive me for beginning a story that I cannot end. But the end is 
not yet upon my lips. It is still a love song in the wind. 


Naaman of the Gadarenes 
On the Death of Stephen 
2 = = C) 


His disciples are dispersed. He gave them the legacy of pain ere He Himself was 
put to death. They are hunted like the deer, and the foxes of the fields, and the 
quiver of the hunter is yet full of arrows. 

But when they are caught and led to death, they are joyous, and their faces 
shine like the face of the bridegroom at the wedding-feast. For He gave them 
also the legacy of joy. 


ok OOK OK 


I had a friend from the North Country, and his name was Stephen; and because 
he proclaimed Jesus as the Son of God, he was led to the market-place and 
stoned. 

And when Stephen fell to earth he outstretched his arms as if he would die as 
his Master had died. His arms were spread like wings ready for flight. And when 
the last gleam of light was fading in his eyes, with my own eyes I saw a smile 
upon his lips. It was a smile like the breath that comes before the end of winter 
for a pledge and a promise of spring. 

How shall I describe it? 

It seemed that Stephen was saying, “If I should go to another world, and other 
men should lead me to another market-place to stone me, even then I would 
proclaim Him for the truth which was in Him, and for that same truth which is in 
me now.” 

And I noticed that there was a man standing near, and looking with pleasure 
upon the stoning of Stephen. 

His name is Saul of Tarsus, and it was he who had yielded Stephen to the 
priests and the Romans and the crowd, for stoning. 

Saul was bald of head and short of stature. His shoulders were crooked and his 


features ill-sorted; and I liked him not. 

I have been told that he is now preaching Jesus from the house tops. It is hard 
to believe. 

But the grave halts not Jesus’ walking to the enemies’ camp to tame and take 
captive those who had opposed Him. 

Still I do not like that man of Tarsus, though I have been told that after 
Stephen’s death he was tamed and conquered on the road to Damascus. But his 
head is too large for his heart to be that of a true disciple. 

And yet perhaps I am mistaken. I am often mistaken. 


Thomas 
On the Forefathers of His Doubts 
(2 = = C) 


My grandfather who was a lawyer once said, “Let us observe truth, but only 
when truth is made manifest unto us.” 

When Jesus called me I heeded Him, for His command was more potent than 
my will; yet I kept my counsel. 

When He spoke and the others were swayed like branches in the wind, I 
listened immovable. Yet I loved Him. 

Three years ago He left us, a scattered company to sing His name, and to be 
His witnesses unto the nations. 

At that time I was called Thomas the Doubter. The shadow of my grandfather 
was still upon me, and always I would have truth made manifest. 

I would even put my hand in my own wound to feel the blood ere I would 
believe in my pain. 

Now a man who loves with his heart yet holds a doubt in his mind, is but a 
slave in a galley who sleeps at his oar and dreams of his freedom, till the lash of 
the master wakes him. 

I myself was that slave, and I dreamed of freedom, but the sleep of my 
grandfather was upon me. My flesh needed the whip of my own day. 

Even in the presence of the Nazarene I had closed my eyes to see my hands 
chained to the oar. 

Doubt is a pain too lonely to know that faith is his twin brother. 

Doubt is a foundling unhappy and astray, and though his own mother who 
gave him birth should find him and enfold him, he would withdraw in caution 
and in fear. 

For Doubt will not know truth till his wounds are healed and restored. 

I doubted Jesus until He made Himself manifest to me, and thrust my own 


hand into His very wounds. 

Then indeed I believed, and after that I was rid of my yesterday and the 
yesterdays of my forefathers. 

The dead in me buried their dead; and the living shall live for the Anointed 
King, even for Him who was the Son of Man. 

Yesterday they told me that I must go and utter His name among the Persians 
and the Hindus. 

I shall go. And from this day to my last day, at dawn and at eventide, I shall 
see my Lord rising in majesty and I shall hear Him speak. 


Elmadam the Logician 
Jesus the Outcast 
2 = = C) 


You bid me speak of Jesus the Nazarene, and much have I to tell, but the time 
has not come. Yet whatever I say of Him now is the truth; for all speech is 
worthless save when it discloses the truth. 

Behold a man disorderly, against all order; a mendicant, opposed to all 
possessions; a drunkard who would only make merry with rogues and 
castaways. 

He was not the proud son of the State, nor was He the protected citizen of the 
Empire; therefore He had contempt for both State and Empire. 

He would live as free and dutiless as the fowls of the air, and for this the 
hunters brought Him to earth with arrows. 

No one shall open the flood gates of his ancestors without drowning. It is the 
law. And because the Nazarene broke the law, He and His witless followers were 
brought to naught. 

And there lived many others like Him, men who would change the course of 
our destiny. 

They themselves were changed, and they were the losers. 

There is a grapeless vine that grows by the city walls. It creeps upward and 
clings to the stones. Should that vine say in her heart, “With my might and my 
weight I shall destroy these walls,” what would other plants say? Surely they 
would laugh at her foolishness. 

Now sir, I cannot but laugh at this man and His ill-advised disciples. 


One of the Marys 
On His Sadness and His Smile 


C 


2 = =i ) 


His head was always high, and the flame of God was in His eyes. 

He was often sad, but His sadness was tenderness shown to those in pain, and 
comradeship given to the lonely. 

When He smiled His smile was as the hunger of those who long after the 
unknown. It was like the dust of stars falling upon the eyelids of children. And it 
was like a morsel of bread in the throat. 

He was sad, yet it was a sadness that would rise to the lips and become a 
smile. 

It was like a golden veil in the forest when autumn is upon the world. And 
sometimes it seemed like moonlight upon the shores of the lake. 

He smiled as if His lips would sing at the wedding-feast. 

Yet He was sad with the sadness of the winged who will not soar above his 
comrade. 


Rumanous, a Greek Poet 
Jesus the Poet 
2 = = C) 


He was a poet. He saw for our eyes and heard for our ears, and our silent words 
were upon His lips; and His fingers touched what we could not feel. 

Out of His heart there flew countless singing birds to the north and to the 
south, and the little flowers on the hill-sides stayed His steps towards the 
heavens. 

Oftentimes I have seen Him bending down to touch the blades of grass. And in 
my heart I have heard Him say: “Little green things, you shall be with me in my 
kingdom, even as the oaks of Besan, and the cedars of Lebanon.” 

He loved all things of loveliness, the shy faces of children, and the myrrh and 
frankincense from the south. 

He loved a pomegranate or a cup of wine given Him in kindness; it mattered 
not whether it was offered by a stranger in the inn or by a rich host. 

And He loved the almond blossoms. I have seen Him gathering them into His 
hands and covering His face with the petals, as though He would embrace with 
His love all the trees in the world. 

He knew the sea and the heavens; and He spoke of pearls which have light that 
is not of this light, and of stars that are beyond our night. 

He knew the mountains as eagles know them, and the valleys as they are 
known by the brooks and the streams. And there was a desert in His silence and 
a garden in His speech. 

Aye, He was a poet whose heart dwelt in a bower beyond the heights, and His 
songs though sung for our ears, were sung for other ears also, and to men in 
another land where life is forever young and time is always dawn. 

Once I too deemed myself a poet, but when I stood before Him in Bethany, I 
knew what it is to hold an instrument with but a single string before one who 


commands all instruments. For in His voice there was the laughter of thunder 
and the tears of rain, and the joyous dancing of trees in the wind. 

And since I have known that my lyre has but one string, and that my voice 
weaves neither the memories of yesterday nor the hopes of tomorrow, I have put 
aside my lyre and I shall keep silence. But always at twilight I shall hearken, and 
I shall listen to the Poet who is the sovereign of all poets. 


Levi, a Disciple 
On Those who would Confound Jesus 
(2 = = C) 


Upon an eventide He passed by my house, and my soul was quickened within 
me. 

He spoke to me and said, “Come, Levi, and follow me.” 

And I followed Him that day. 

And at eventide of the next day I begged Him to enter my house and be my 
guest. And He and His friends crossed my threshold and blessed me and my wife 
and my children. 

And I had other guests. They were publicans and men of learning, but they 
were against Him in their hearts. 

And when we were sitting about the board, one of the publicans questioned 
Jesus, saying, “Is it true that you and your disciples break the law, and make fire 
on the Sabbath day?” 

And Jesus answered him saying, “We do indeed make fire on the Sabbath day. 
We would inflame the Sabbath day, and we would burn with our touch the dry 
stubble of all days.” 

And another publican said, “It was brought to us that you drink wine with the 
unclean at the inn.” 

And Jesus answered, “Aye, these also we would comfort. Came we here 
except to share the loaf and the cup with the uncrowned and the unshod amongst 
you? 

“Few, aye too few are the featherless who dare the wind, and many are the 
winged and full-fledged yet in the nest. 

“And we would feed them all with our beak, both the sluggish and the swift.” 

And another publican said, “Have I not been told that you would protect the 
harlots of Jerusalem?” 


Then in the face of Jesus I saw, as it were, the rocky heights of Lebanon, and 
He said, “It is true. 

“On the day of reckoning these women shall rise before the throne of my 
Father, and they shall be made pure by their own tears. But you shall be held 
down by the chains of your own judgment. 

“Babylon was not put to waste by her prostitutes; Babylon fell to ashes that the 
eyes of her hypocrites might no longer see the light of day.” 

And other publicans would have questioned Him, but I made a sign and bade 
them be silent, for I knew He would confound them; and they too were my 
guests, and I would not have them put to shame. 

When it was midnight the publicans left my house, and their souls were 
limping. 

Then I closed my eyes and I saw, as if in a vision, seven women in white 
raiment standing about Jesus. Their arms were crossed upon their bosoms, and 
their heads were bent down, and I looked deep into the mist of my dream and 
beheld the face of one of the seven women, and it shone in my darkness. 

It was the face of a harlot who lived in Jerusalem. 

Then I opened my eyes and looked at Him, and He was smiling at me and at 
the others who had not left the board. 

And I closed my eyes again, and I saw in a light seven men in white garments 
standing around Him. And I beheld the face of one of them. 


It was the face of the thief who was crucified afterward at His right hand. 
oK OK OK 


And later Jesus and His comrades left my house for the road. 


A Widow in Galilee 
Jesus the Cruel 
2 = = C) 


My son was my first and my only born. He laboured in our field and he was 
contented until he heard the man called Jesus speaking to the multitude. 

Then my son suddenly became different, as if a new spirit, foreign and 
unwholesome, had embraced his spirit. 

He abandoned the field and the garden; and he abandoned me also. He became 
worthless, a creature of the highways. 

That man Jesus of Nazareth was evil, for what good man would separate a son 
from his mother? 

The last thing my child said to me was this: “I am going with one of His 
disciples to the North Country. My life is established upon the Nazarene. You 
have given me birth, and for that I am grateful to you. But I needs must go. Am I 
not leaving with you our rich land, and all our silver and gold? I shall take 
naught but this garment and this staff.” 

Thus my son spoke, and departed. 

And now the Romans and the priests have laid hold upon Jesus and crucified 
Him; and they have done well. 

Aman who would part mother and son could not be godly. 

The man who sends our children to the cities of the Gentiles cannot be our 
friend. 

I know my son will not return to me. I saw it in his eyes. And for this I hate 
Jesus of Nazareth who caused me to be alone in this unploughed field and this 
withered garden. 

And I hate all those who praise Him. 

Not many days ago they told me that Jesus once said, “My father and my 
mother and my brethren are those who hear my word and follow me.” 


But why should sons leave their mothers to follow His footsteps? 

And why should the milk of my breast be forgotten for a fountain not yet 
tasted? And the warmth of my arms be forsaken for the Northland, cold and 
unfriendly? 

Aye, I hate the Nazarene, and I shall hate Him to the end of my days, for He 
has robbed me of my first-born, my only son. 


Judas, the Cousin of Jesus 
On the Death of John the Baptist 
2 = = C) 


Upon a night in the month of August we were with the Master on a heath not far 
from the lake. The heath was called by the ancients the Meadow of Skulls. 


And Jesus was reclining on the grass and gazing at the stars. 


And of a sudden two men came rushing towards us breathless. They were as if 
in agony, and they fell prostrate at the feet of Jesus. 


And Jesus stood up and He said, “Whence came you?” 

And one of the men answered, “From Machaereus.” 

And Jesus looked upon him and was troubled, and He said, “What of John?” 

And the man said, “He was slain this day. He was beheaded in his prison 
cell.” 

Then Jesus lifted up His head. And then He walked a little way from us. After 
a while He stood again in our midst. 

And He said, “The king could have slain the prophet ere this day. Verily the 
king has tried the pleasure of His subjects. Kings of yore were not so slow in 
giving the head of a prophet to the head-hunters. 

“T grieve not for John, but rather for Herod, who let fall the sword. Poor king, 
like an animal caught and led with a ring and a rope. 

“Poor petty tetrarchs lost in their own darkness, they stumble and fall down. 
And what could you of the stagnant sea but dead fishes?” 

“T hate not kings. Let them rule men, but only when they are wiser than men.” 

And the Master looked at the two sorrowful faces and then He looked at us, 
and He spoke again and said, “John was born wounded, and the blood of his 
wounds streamed forth with his words. He was freedom not yet free from itself, 
and patient only with the straight and the just. 

“In truth he was a voice crying in the land of the deaf; and I loved him in his 


pain and his aloneness. 

“And I loved his pride that would give its head to the sword ere it would yield 
it to the dust. 

“Verily I say unto you that John, the son of Zachariah, was the last of his race, 
and like his forefathers he was slain between the threshold of the temple and the 
altar.” 

And again Jesus walked away from us. 

Then He returned and He said, “Forever it has been that those who rule for an 
hour would slay the rulers of years. And forever they would hold a trial and 
pronounce condemnation upon a man not yet born, and decree his death ere he 
commits the crime. 

“The son of Zachariah shall live with me in my kingdom and his day shall be 
long.” 

Then He turned to the disciples of John and said, “Every deed has its morrow. 
I myself may be the morrow of this deed. Go back to my friend’s friends, and tell 
them I shall be with them.” 

And the two men walked away from us, and they seemed less heavy-hearted. 

Then Jesus laid Himself down again upon the grass and outstretched His arms, 
and again He gazed at the stars. 

Now it was late. And I lay not far from Him, and I would fain have rested, but 
there was a hand knocking upon the gate of my sleep, and I lay awake until Jesus 
and the dawn called me again to the road. 


The Man from the Desert 
On the Money-Changers 
2 = = C) 


I was a stranger in Jerusalem. I had come to the Holy City to behold the great 
temple, and to sacrifice upon the altar, for my wife had given twin sons to my 
tribe. 

And after I had made my offering, I stood in the portico of them temple 
looking down upon the money-changers and those who sold doves for sacrifice, 
and listening to the great noise in the court. 

And as I stood there came of a sudden a man into the midst of the money- 
changers and those who sold doves. 

He was a man of majesty, and He came swiftly. 

In His hand He held a rope of goat’s hide; and He began to overturn the tables 
of the money-changers and to beat the pedlars of birds with the rope. 

And I heard Him saying with a loud voice, “Render these birds unto the sky 
which is their nest.” 

Men and women fled from before His face, and He moved amongst them as 
the whirling wind moves on the sad-hills. 

All this came to pass in but a moment, and then the court of the Temple was 
emptied of the money-changers. Only the man stood there alone, and His 
followers stood at a distance. 

Then I turned my face and I saw another man in the portico of the temple. And 
I walked towards him and said, “Sir, who is this man who stands alone, even like 
another temple?” And he answered me, “This is Jesus of Nazareth, a prophet 
who has appeared of late in Galilee. Here in Jerusalem all men hate Him.” 

And I said, “My heart was strong enough to be with His whip, and yielding 
enough to be at His feet.” 

And Jesus turned towards His followers who were awaiting Him. But before 


He reached them, three of the temple doves flew back, and one alighted upon 
His left shoulder and the other two at His feet. And he touched each one 
tenderly. Then He walked on, and there were leagues in every step of His steps. 

Now tell me, what power had He to attack and disperse hundreds of men and 
women without opposition? I was told that they all hate Him, yet no one stood 
before Him on that day. Had He plucked out the fangs of hate on His way to the 
court of the temple? 


Peter 
On the Morrow of His Followers 
(> = = C) 


Once at sundown Jesus led us into the village of Beithsaida. We were a tired 
company, and the dust of the road was upon us. And we came to a great house in 
the midst of a garden, and the owner stood at the gate. 

And Jesus said to him, “These men are weary and footsore. Let them sleep in 
your house. The night is cold and they are in need of warmth and rest.” 

And the rich man said, “They shall not sleep in my house.” 

And Jesus said, “Suffer them then to sleep in your garden.” 

And the man answered, “Nay, they shall not sleep in my garden.” 

Then Jesus turned to us and said, “This is what your tomorrow will be, and 
this present is like your future. All doors shall be closed in your face, and not 
even the gardens that lie under the stars may be your couch. 

“Should your feet indeed be patient with the road and follow me, it may be 
you will find a basin and a bed, and perhaps bread and wine also. But if it should 
be that you find none of those things, forget not then that you have crossed one 
of my deserts. 

“Come, let us go forth.” 

And the rich man was disturbed, and his face was changed, and he muttered to 
himself words that I did not hear; and he shrank away from us and turned into 
his garden. 

And we followed Jesus upon the road. 


Melachi of Babylon, an Astronomer 
The Miracles of Jesus 
2 = = C) 


You question me concerning the miracles of Jesus. 

Every thousand thousand years the sun and the moon and this earth and all her 
sister planets meet in a straight line, and they confer for a moment together. 

Then they slowly disperse and await the passing of another thousand thousand 
years. 

There are no miracles beyond the seasons, yet you and I do not know all the 
seasons. And what if a season shall be made manifest in the shape of a man? 

In Jesus the elements of our bodies and our dreams came together according to 
law. All that was timeless before Him became timeful in Him. 

They say He gave sight to the blind and walking to the paralysed, and that He 
drove devils out of madmen. 

Perchance blindness is but a dark thought that can be overcome by a burning 
thought. Perchance a withered limb is but idleness that can be quickened by 
energy. And perhaps the devils, these restless elements in our life, are driven out 
by the angels of peace and serenity. 

They say He raised the dead to life. If you can tell me what is death, then I will 
tell you what is life. 

In a field I have watched an acorn, a thing so still and seemingly useless. And 
in the spring I have seen that acorn take roots and rise, the beginning of an oak 
tree, towards the sun. 

Surely you would deem this a miracle, yet that miracle is wrought a thousand 
thousand times in the drowsiness of every autumn and the passion of every 
spring. 

Why shall it not be wrought in the heart of man? Shall not the seasons meet in 
the hand or upon the lips of a Man Anointed? 


If our God has given to earth the art to nestle seed whilst the seed is seemingly 
dead, why shall He not give to the heart of man to breathe life into another heart, 


even a heart seemingly dead? 
mK OK OK 


I have spoken of these miracles which I deem but little beside the greater 
miracle, which is the man Himself, the Wayfarer, the man who turned my dross 
into gold, who taught me how to love those who hate me, and in so doing 
brought me comfort and gave sweet dreams to my sleep. 

This is the miracle in my own life. 

My soul was blind, my soul was lame. I was possessed by restless spirits, and I 
was dead. 

But now I see clearly, and I walk erect. I am at peace, and I live to witness and 
proclaim my own being every hour of the day. 

And I am not one of His followers. I am but an old astronomer who visits the 
fields of space once a season, and who would be heedful of the law and the 
miracles thereof. 

And I am at the twilight of my time, but whenever I would seek its dawning, I 
seek the youth of Jesus. 

And for ever shall age seek youth. In me now it is knowledge that is seeking 
vision. 


A Philosopher 
On Wonder and Beauty 
(2 = = C) 


When he was with us He gazed at us and at our world with eyes of wonder, for 
His eyes were not veiled with the veil of years, and all that He saw was clear in 
the light of His youth. 

Though He knew the depth of beauty, He was forever surprised by its peace 
and its majesty; and He stood before the earth as the first man had stood before 
the first day. 

We whose senses have been dulled, we gaze in full daylight and yet we do not 
see. We would cup our ears, but we do not hear; and stretch forth our hands, but 
we do not touch. And though all the incense of Arabia is burned, we go our way 
and do not smell. 

We see not the ploughman returning from his field at eventide; nor hear the 
shepherd’s flute when he leads his flock to the fold, nor do we stretch our arms 
to touch the sunset; and our nostrils hunger no longer for the roses of Sharon. 

Nay, we honour no kings without kingdoms; nor hear the sound of harps save 
when the strings are plucked by hands; nor do we see a child playing in our olive 
grove as if he were a young olive tree. And all words must needs rise from lips 
of flesh, or else we deem each other dumb and deaf. 

In truth we gaze but do not see, and hearken but do not hear; we eat and drink 
but do not taste. And there lies the difference between Jesus of Nazareth and 
ourselves. 

His senses were all continually made new, and the world to Him was always a 
new world. 

To Him the lisping of a babe was not less than the cry of all mankind, while to 
us it is only lisping. 

To Him the root of a buttercup was a longing towards God, while to us it is 
naught but a root. 


Uriah, an Old Man of Nazareth 
He was a Stranger in our Midst 
2 = = C) 


He was a Stranger in our midst, and His life was hidden with dark veils. 

He walked not the path of our God, but followed the course of the foul and the 
infamous. 

His childhood revolted, and rejected the sweet milk of our nature. 

His youth was inflamed like dry grass that burns in the night. 

And when He became a man, He took arms against us all. 

Such men are conceived in the ebb tide of human kindness, and born in unholy 
tempests. And in tempests they live a day and the perish forever. 

Do you not remember Him, a boy overweening, who would argue with our 
learned elders, and laugh at their dignity? 

And remember you not His youth, when He lived by the saw and the chisel? 
He would not accompany our sons and daughters on their holidays. He would 
walk alone. 

And He would not return the salutation of those who hailed Him, as though He 
were above us. 

I myself met Him once in the field and greeted Him, and He only smiled, and 
in His smile I beheld arrogance and insult. 

Not long afterward my daughter went with her companions to the vineyards to 
gather the grapes, and she spoke to Him and He did not answer her. 

He spoke only to the whole company of grape-gatherers, as if my daughter had 
not been among them. 

When He abandoned His people and turned vagabond He became naught but a 
babbler. His voice was like a claw in our flesh, and the sound of His voice is still 
a pain in our memory. 

He would utter only evil of us and of our fathers and forefathers. And His 


tongue sought our bosoms like a poisoned arrow. 
Such was Jesus. 


If He had been my son, I would have committed Him with the Roman legions 
to Arabia, and I would have begged the captain to place Him in the forefront of 
the battle, so that the archer of the foe might mark Him, and free me of His 
insolence. 

But I have no son. And mayhap I should be grateful. For what if my son had 
been an enemy of his own people, and my grey hairs were now seeking the dust 
with shame, my white beard humbled? 


Nicodemus the Poet 
On Fools and Jugglers 
2 = = C) 


Many are the fools who say that Jesus stood in His own path and opposed 
Himself; that He knew not His own mind, and in the absence of that knowledge 
confounded Himself. 

Many indeed are the owls who know no song unlike their own hooting. 

You and I know the jugglers of words who would honour only a greater 
juggler, men who carry their heads in baskets to the market-place and sell them 
to the first bidder. 

We know the pygmies who abuse the sky-man. And we know what the weed 
would say of the oak tree and the cedar. 

I pity them that they cannot rise to the heights. 

I pity the shrivelling thorn envying the elm that dares the seasons. 

But pity, though enfolded by the regret of all the angels, can bring them no 
light. 

I know the scarecrow whose rotting garments flutter in the corn, yet he himself 
is dead to the corn and to the singing wind. 

I know the wingless spider that weaves a net for all who fly. 

I know the crafty, the blowers of horns and the beaters of drums, who in the 
abundance of their own noise cannot hear the skylark nor the east wind in the 
forest. 

I know him who paddles against all streams, but never finds the source, who 
runs with all rivers, but never dares to the sea. 

I know him who offers his unskilled hands to the builder of the temple, and 
when his unskilled hands are rejected, says in the darkness of his heart, “I will 
destroy all that shall be builded.” 

I know all these. They are the men who object that Jesus said on a certain day, 


“T bring peace unto you,” and on another day, “I bring a sword.” 

They cannot understand that in truth He said, “I bring peace unto men of 
goodwill, and I lay a sword between him who would peace and him who would a 
sword.” 

They wonder that He who said, “My kingdom is not of this earth,” said also, 
“Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s”; and know not that if they would 
indeed be free to enter the kingdom of their passion, they must not resist the 
gate-keeper of their necessities. It behooves them gladly to pay that dole to enter 
into that city. 

There are the men who say, “He preached tenderness and kindliness and filial 
love, yet He would not heed His mother and His brothers when they sought Him 
in the streets of Jerusalem.” 

They do not know that His mother and brothers in their loving fear would have 
had Him return to the bench of the carpenter, whereas He was opening our eyes 
to the dawn of a new day. 

His mother and His brothers would have had Him live in the shadow of death, 
but He Himself was challenging death upon yonder hill that He might live in our 
sleepless memory. 

I know these moles that dig paths to nowhere. Are they not the ones who 
accuse Jesus of glorifying Himself in that He said to the multitude, “I am the 
path and the gate to salvation,’ and even called Himself the life and the 
resurrection. 

But Jesus was not claiming more than the month of May claims in her high 
tide. 

Was He not to tell the shining truth because it was so shining? 

He indeed said that He was the way and the life and the resurrection of the 
heart; and I myself as a testimony to His truth. 

Do you not remember me, Nicodemus, who believed in naught but the laws 
and decrees and was in continual subjection to observances? 

And behold me now, a man who walks with life and laughs with the sun from 
the first moment it smiles upon the mountain until it yields itself to bed behind 
the hills. 

Why do you halt before the word salvation? I myself through Him have 
attained my salvation. 

I care not for what shall befall me tomorrow, for I know that Jesus quickened 


my sleep and made my distant dreams my companions and my road-fellows. 

Am I less man because I believe in a greater man? 

The barriers of flesh and bone fell down when the Poet of Galilee spoke to me; 
and I was held by a spirit, and was lifted to the heights, and in mid-air my wings 
gathered the song of passion. 

And when I dismounted from the wind and in the Sanhedrim my pinions were 
shorn, even then my ribs, my featherless wings, kept and guarded the song. And 
all the poverties of the lowlands cannot rob me of my treasure. 

I have said enough. Let the deaf bury the humming of life in their dead ears. I 
am content with the sound of His lyre, which He held and struck while the hands 
of His body were nailed and bleeding. 


Joseph of Arimethea 
The Two Streams in Jesus’ Heart 
2 = = C) 


There were two streams running in the heart of the Nazarene: the stream of 
kinship to God whom He called Father, and the stream of rapture which He 
called the kingdom of the Above-world. 

And in my solitude I thought of Him and I followed these two streams in His 
heart. Upon the banks of the one I met my own soul; and sometimes my soul 
was a beggar and a wanderer, and sometimes it was a princess in her garden. 

Then I followed the other stream in His heart, and on my way I met one who 
had been beaten and robbed of his gold, and he was smiling. And farther on I 
saw the robber who had robbed him, and there were unshed tears upon his face. 

Then I heard the murmur of these two streams in my own bosom also, and I 
was gladdened. 

When I visited Jesus the day before Pontius Pilatus and the elders laid hands 
on Him, we talked long, and I asked Him many questions, and He answered my 
questionings with graciousness; and when I left Him I knew He was the Lord 
and Master of this our earth. 

It is long since our cedar tree has fallen, but its fragrance endures, and will 
forever seek the four comers of the earth. 


Georgus of Beirut 
On Strangers 
(? = = C) 


He and his friends were in the grove of pines beyond my hedge, and He was 
talking to them. 

I stood near the hedge and listened. And I knew who He was, for His fame had 
reached these shores ere He Himself visited them. 

When He ceased speaking I approached Him, and I said, “Sir, come with these 
men and honour me and my roof.” 

And He smiled upon me and said, “Not this day, my friend. Not this day.” 

And there was a blessing in His words, and His voice enfolded me like a 
garment on a cold night. 

Then He turned to His friends and said, “Behold a man who deems us not 
strangers, and though He has not seen us ere this day, he bids us to His 
threshold. 

“Verily in my kingdom there are no strangers. Our life is but the life of all 
other men, given us that we may know all men, and in that knowledge love 
them. 

“The deeds of all men are but our deeds, both the hidden and the revealed. 

“T charge you not to be one self but rather many selves, the householder and 
the homeless, the ploughman and the sparrow that picks the grain ere it slumber 
in the earth, the giver who gives in gratitude, and the receiver who receives in 
pride and recognition. 

“The beauty of the day is not only in what you see, but in what other men see. 

“For this I have chosen you from among the many who have chosen me.” 

Then He turned to me again and smiled and said, “I say these things to you 
also, and you also shall remember them.” 

Then I entreated Him and said, “Master, will you not visit in my house?” 


And He answered, “I know your heart, and I have visited your larger house.” 
And as He walked away with His disciples He said, “Good-night, and may 
your house be large enough to shelter all the wanderers of the land.” 


Mary Magdalene 
His Mouth was like the Heart of a Pomegranate 
2 = = C) 


His mouth was like the heart of a pomegranate, and the shadows in His eyes 
were deep. 


And He was gentle, like a man mindful of his own strength. 

In my dreams I beheld the kings of the earth standing in awe in His presence. 

I would speak of His face, but how shall I? 

It was like night without darkness, and like day without the noise of day. 

It was a sad face, and it was a joyous face. 

And well I remember how once He raised His hand towards the sky, and His 
parted fingers were like the branches of an elm. 

And I remember Him pacing the evening. He was not walking. He Himself 
was a road above the road; even as a cloud above the earth that would descend to 
refresh the earth. 

But when I stood before Him and spoke to him, He was a man, and His face 
was powerful to behold. And He said to me, “What would you, Miriam?” 

I would not answer Him, but my wings enfolded my secret, and I was made 
warm. 

And because I could bear His light no more, I turned and walked away, but not 
in shame. I was only shy, and I would be alone, with His fingers upon the strings 
of my heart. 


Jotham of Nazareth to a Roman 
On Living and Being 
2 = = C) 


My friend, you like all other Romans would conceive life rather than live it. You 
would rule lands rather than be ruled by the spirit. 


You would conquer races and be cursed by them rather than stay in Rome and 
be blest and happy. 

You think but of armies marching and of ships launched into the sea. 

How shall you then understand Jesus of Nazareth, a man simple and alone, 
who came without armies or ships, to establish a kingdom in the heart and an 
empire in the free spaces of the soul? 

How shall you understand the man who was not a warrior, but who came with 
the power of the mighty ether? 

He was not a god, He was a man like unto ourselves; but in Him the myrrh of 
the earth rose to meet the frankincense of the sky; and in His words our lisping 
embraced the whispering of the unseen; and in His voice we heard a song 
unfathomable. 


Aye, Jesus was a man and not a god, and therein lies our wonder and our 
surprise. 

But you Romans wonder not save at the gods, and no man shall surprise you. 
Therefore you understand not the Nazarene. 

He belonged to the youth of the mind and you belong to its old age. 

You govern us today; but let us wait another day. 

Who knows that this man with neither armies nor ships shall govern 
tomorrow? 

We who follow the spirit shall sweat blood while journeying after Him. But 
Rome shall lie a white skeleton in the sun. 

We shall suffer much, yet we shall endure and we shall live. But Rome must 


needs fall into the dust. 

Yet if Rome, when humbled and made low, shall pronounce His name, He will 
heed her voice. And He will breathe new life into her bones that she may rise 
again, a city among the cities of the earth. 

But this He shall do without legions, nor with slaves to oar His galleys. He 
will be alone. 


Ephraim of Jericho 
The Other Wedding-Feast 
2 = = C) 


When he came again to Jericho I sought Him out and said to Him, “Master, on 
the morrow my son will take a wife. I beg you come to the wedding-feast and do 
us honour, even as you honoured the wedding at Cana of Galilee.” 


And He answered, “It is true that I was once a guest at a wedding-feast, but I 
shall not be a guest again. I am myself now the Bridegroom.” 

And I said, “I entreat you, Master, come to the wedding-feast of my son.” 

And He smiled as though He would rebuke me, and said, “Why do you entreat 
me? Have you not wine enough?” 

And I said, “My jugs are full, Master; yet I beseech you, come to my son’s 
wedding-feast.” 

Then He said, “Who knows? I may come, I may surely come, if your heart is 
an altar in your temple.” 

Upon the morrow my son was married, but Jesus came not to the wedding- 
feast. And though we had many guests, I felt that no one had come. 

In very truth, I myself who welcomed the guests, was not there. 


Perhaps my heart had not been an altar when I invited Him. Perhaps I desired 
another miracle. 


Barca, a Merchant of Tyre 
On Buying and Selling 
2 = = C) 


I believe that neither the Romans nor the Jews understood Jesus of Nazareth, nor 
did His disciples who now preach His name. 

The Romans slew Him and that was a blunder. The Galileans would make a 
god of Him and that is a mistake. 

Jesus was the heart of man. 

I have sailed the Seven Seas with my ships, and bartered with kings and 
princes and with cheats and the wily in the market-places of distant cities; but 
never have I seen a man who understood merchants as He did. 

I heard Him once tell this parable: 

“A merchant left his country for a foreign land. He had two servants, and he 
gave each a handful of gold, saying: ‘Even as I go abroad, you also shall go forth 
and seek profit. Make just exchange, and see that you serve in giving and 
taking.’ 

“And after a year the merchant returned. 

“And he asked his two servants what they had done with his gold. 

“The first servant said, ‘Behold, Master, I have bought and sold, and I have 
gained.’ 

“And the merchant answered, “The gain shall be yours, for you have done 
well, and have been faithful to me and to yourself.’ 

“Then the other servant stood forth and said, ‘Sir, I feared the loss of your 
money; and I did not buy nor sell. Behold, it is all here in this purse.’ 

“And the merchant took the gold, and said, ‘Little is your faith. To barter and 
lose is better than not to go forth. For even as the wind scatters her seed and 
waits for the fruit, so must all merchants. It were fitter for you henceforth to 
serve others.’” 


When Jesus spoke thus, though He was no merchant, He disclosed the secret 
of commerce. 

Moreover, His parables often brought to my mind lands more distant than my 
journeys, and yet nearer than my house and my goods. 

But the young Nazarene was not a god; and it is a pity His followers seek to 
make a god of such a sage. 


Phumiah, the High Priestess of Sidon 
An Invocation 
Sesare—S 


Take your harps and let me sing. 

Beat your strings, the silver and the gold; 
For I would sing the dauntless Man 

Who slew the dragon of the valley, 

Then gazed down with pity 

Upon the thing He had slain. 


Take your harps and sing with me 

The lofty Oak upon the height, 

The sky-hearted and the ocean-handed Man, 
Who kissed the pallid lips of death, 

Yet quivers now upon the mouth of life. 


Take your harps and let us sing 

The fearless Hunter on the hill, 

Who marked the beast, and shot His viewless arrow, 
And brought the horn and tusk 

Down to the earth. 


Take your harps and sing with me 
The valiant Youth who conquered the mountain cities, 


And the cities of the plain that coiled like serpents in the sand. 


He fought not against pygmies but against gods 


Who hungered for our flesh and thirsted for our blood. 


And like the first Golden Hawk 

He would rival only eagles; 

For His wings were vast and proud 
And would not outwing the less winged. 


Take your harps and sing with me 

The joyous song of sea and cliff. 

The gods are dead, 

And they are lying still 

In the forgotten isle of a forgotten sea. 

And He who slew them sits upon His throne. 


He was but a youth. 
Spring had not yet given Him full beard, 
And His summer was still young in His field. 


Take your harps and sing with me 

The tempest in the forest 

That breaks the dry branch and the leafless twig, 

Yet sends the living root to nestle deeper at the breast of earth. 


Take your harps and sing with me 

The deathless song of our Beloved. 

Nay, my maidens, stay your hands. 

Lay by your harps. 

We cannot sing Him now. 

The faint whisper of our song cannot reach His tempest, 
Nor pierce the majesty of His silence. 


Lay by your harps and gather close around me, 
I would repeat His words to you, 


And I would tell you of His deeds, 
For the echo of His voice is deeper than our passion. 


Benjamin the Scribe 
Let the Dead Bury Their Dead 
2 = = C) 


It has been said that Jesus was the enemy of Rome and Judea. 

But I say that Jesus was the enemy of no man and no race. 

I have heard Him say, “The birds of the air and the mountain tops are not 
mindful of the serpents in their dark holes. 

“Let the dead bury their dead. Be you yourself among the living, and soar 
high.” 

I was not one of His disciples. I was but one of the many who went after Him 
to gaze upon His face. 

He looked upon Rome and upon us who are the slaves of Rome, as a father 
looks upon his children playing with toys and fighting among themselves for the 
larger toy. And He laughed from His height. 

He was greater than State and race; He was greater than revolution. 

He was single and alone, and He was an awakening. 

He wept all our unshed tears and smiled all our revolts. 

We knew it was in His power to be born with all who are not yet born, and to 
bid them see, not with their eyes but with His vision. 

Jesus was the beginning of a new kingdom upon the earth, and that kingdom 
shall remain. 

He was the son and the grandson of all the kings who builded the kingdom of 
the spirit. 

And only the kings of spirit have ruled our world. 


Zacchaeus 
On the Fate of Jesus 
(> = = C) 


You believe in what you hear said. Believe in the unsaid, for the silence of men 
is nearer the truth than their words. 

You ask if Jesus could have escaped His shameful death and saved His 
followers from persecution. 

I answer, He could indeed have escaped had He chosen, but He did not seek 
safety nor was He mindful of protecting His flock from wolves of the night. 

He knew His fate and the morrow of His constant lovers. He foretold and 
prophesied what should befall every one of us. He sought not His death; but He 
accepted death as a husband-man shrouding his corn with earth, accepts the 
winter, and then awaits the spring and harvest; and as a builder lays the largest 
stone in the foundation. 

We were men of Galilee and from the slopes of Lebanon. Our Master could 
have led us back to our country, to live with His youth in our gardens until old 
age should come and whisper us back into the years. 

Was anything barring His path back to the temples of our villages where others 
were reading the prophets and then disclosing their hearts? 

Could He not have said, “Now I go east with the west wind,” and so saying 
dismiss us with a smile upon His lips? 

Aye, He could have said, “Go back to your kin. The world is not ready for me. 
I shall return a thousand years hence. Teach your children to await my return.” 

He could have done this had He so chosen. 

But He knew that to build the temple invisible He must needs lay Himself the 
comer-stone, and lay us around as little pebbles cemented close to Himself. 

He knew that the sap of His tree must rise from its roots, and He poured His 
blood upon its roots; and to Him it was not sacrifice but rather gain. 


Death is the revealer. The death of Jesus revealed His life. 


Had He escaped you and His enemies, you would have been the conquerors of 
the world. Therefore He did not escape. 

Only He who desires all shall give all. 

Aye, Jesus could have escaped His enemies and lived to old age. But He knew 
the passing of the seasons, and He would sing His song. 

What man facing the armed world would not be conquered for the moment 
that he might overcome the ages? 

And now you ask who, in very truth, slew Jesus, the Romans or the priests of 
Jerusalem? 

Neither the Romans slew Him, nor the priests. The whole world stood to 
honour Him upon that hill. 


Jonathan 
Among the Water-Lilies 
(2 = = C) 


Upon a day my beloved and I were rowing upon the lake of sweet waters. And 
the hills of Lebanon were about us. 

We moved beside the weeping willows, and the reflections of the willows were 
deep around us. 

And while I steered the boat with an oar, my beloved took her lute and sang 
thus: 


What flower save the lotus knows the waters and the sun? 

What heart save the lotus heart shall know both earth and sky? 
Behold my love, the golden flower that floats ‘twixt deep and high 
Even as you and I float betwixt a love that has for ever been 

And shall for ever be. 


Dip your oar, my love, 

And let me touch my strings. 

Let us follow the willows, and let us leave not the water-lilies. 
In Nazareth there lives a Poet, and His heart is like the lotus. 
He has visited the soul of woman, 

He knows her thirst is growing out of the waters, 

And her hunger for the sun, though all her lips are fed. 

They say He walks in Galilee. 

I say He is rowing with us. 

Can you not see His face, my love? 

Can you not see, where the willow bough and its reflection meet, 


He is moving as we move? 


Beloved, it is good to know the youth of life. 
It is good to know its singing joy. 

Would that you might always have the oar, 
And I my stringed lute, 

Where the lotus laughs in the sun, 

And the willow is dipping to the waters, 
And His voice is upon my strings. 


Dip your oar, my beloved, 
And let me touch my strings. 
There is a Poet in Nazareth 
Who knows and loves us both. 
Dip your oar, my lover, 

And let me touch my strings. 


Hannah of Bethsaida 
She Speaks of her Father’s Sister 
2 = = C) 


The sister of my father had left us in her youth to dwell in a hut beside her 
father’s ancient vineyard. 

She lived alone, and the people of the countryside sought her in their maladies, 
and she healed them with green herbs, and with roots and flowers dried in the 
sun. 

And they deemed her a seeress; but there were those also who called her witch 
and sorceress. 

One day my father said to me, “Take these loaves of wheaten bread to my 
sister, and take this jug of wine and this basket of raisins.” 

And it was all put upon the back of a colt, and I followed the road until I 
reached the vineyard, and the hut of my father’s sister. And she was gladdened. 

Now as we Sat together in the cool of the day, a man came by upon the road, 
and He greeted the sister of my father, saying, “Good-even to you, and the 
blessing of the night be upon you.” 

Then she rose up; and she stood as in awe before Him and said, “Good-even to 
you, master of all good spirits, and conqueror of all evil spirits.” 

The man looked at her with tender eyes, and then He passed on by. 

But I laughed in my heart. Methought my father’s sister was mad. But now I 
know that she was not mad. It was I who did not understand. 

She knew of my laughter, though it was hidden. 

And she spoke, but not in anger. She said, “Listen, my daughter, and hearken 
and keep my word in remembrance: the man who but now passed by, like the 
shadow of a bird flying between the sun and the earth, shall prevail against the 
Caesars and the empire of the Caesars. He shall wrestle with the crowned bull of 
Chaldea, and the man-headed lion of Egypt, and He shall overcome them; and 


He shall rule the world. 

“But this land that now He walks shall come to naught; and Jerusalem, which 
sits proudly upon the hill, shall drift away in smoke upon the wind of 
desolation.” 

When she spoke thus, my laughter turned to stillness and I was quiet. Then I 
said, “Who is this man, and of what country and tribe does He come? And how 
shall He conquer the great kings and the empires of the great kings?” 

And she answered, “He is one born here in this land, but we have conceived 
Him in our longing from the beginning of years. He is of all tribes and yet of 
none. He shall conquer by the word of His mouth and by the flame of His 
spirit.” 

Then suddenly she rose and stood up like a pinnacle of rock; and she said, 
“May the angel of the Lord forgive me for pronouncing this word also: He shall 
be slain, and His youth shall be shrouded, and He shall be laid in silence beside 
the tongue-less heart of the earth. And the maidens of Judea shall weep for 
Him.” 

Then she lifted her hand skyward and spoke again, and she said, “But He shall 
be slain only in the body. 

“In the spirit He shall rise and go forth leading His host from this land where 
the sun is born, to the land where the sun is slain at eventide. 

“And His name shall be first among men.” 

She was an aged seeress when she said these things, and I was but a girl, a 
field unploughed, a stone not yet in a wall. 

But all that she beheld in the mirror of her mind has come to pass even in my 
day. 

Jesus of Nazareth rose from the dead and led men and women unto the people 
of the sunset. The city that yielded Him to judgment was given unto destruction; 
and in the Judgment Hall where He was tried and sentenced, the owl hoots a 
dirge while the night weeps the dew of her heart upon the fallen marble. 

And I am an old woman, and the years bend me down. My people are no more 
and my race is vanished. 

I saw Him but once again after that day, and once again heard His voice. It was 
upon a hill-top when He was talking to His friends and followers. 

And now I am old and alone, yet still He visits my dreams. 

He comes like a white angel with pinions; and with His grace He hushes my 


dread of darkness. And He uplifts me to dreams yet more distant. 

I am still a field unploughed, a ripe fruit that would not fall. The most that I 
possess is the warmth of the sun, and the memory of that man. 

I know that among my people these shall not rise again king nor prophet nor 
priest, even as the sister of my father foretold. 

We shall pass with the flowing of the rivers, and we shall be nameless. 

But those who crossed Him in mid-stream shall be remembered for crossing 
Him in mid-stream. 


Manasseh 
On the Speech and Gesture of Jesus 


Yes, I used to hear Him speak. There was always a ready word upon His lips. 

But I admired Him as a man rather than as a leader. He preached something 
beyond my liking, perhaps beyond my reason. And I would have no man preach 
to me. 

I was taken by His voice and His gestures, not by the substance of His speech. 
He charmed me but never convinced me; for He was too vague, too distant and 
obscure to reach my mind. 

I have known other men like Him. They are never constant nor are they 
consistent. It is with eloquence not with principles that they hold your ear and 
your passing thought, but never the core of your heart. 

What a pity that His enemies confronted Him and forced the issue. It was not 
necessary. I believe their hostility will add to His stature and turn His mildness to 
power. 

For is it not strange that in opposing a man you give Him courage? And in 
staying His feet you give Him wings? 

I know not His enemies, yet I am certain that in their fear of a harmless man 
they have lent Him strength and made Him dangerous. 


Jephtha of Caesarea 
A Man Weary of Jesus 
(> = = C) 


This man who fills your day and haunts your night is repellent to me. Yet you 
would tire my eyes with His sayings and my mind with His deeds. 

I am weary of His words, and all that He did. His very name offends me, and 
the name of His countryside. I will none of Him. 

Why make you a prophet of a man who was but a shadow? Why see a tower in 
this sand-dune, or imagine a lake in the raindrops gathered together in this hoof- 
print? 

I scorn not the echo of caves in valleys nor the long shadows of the sunset; but 
I would not listen to the deceptions that hum in your head, nor study the 
reflections in your eyes. 

What word did Jesus utter that Halliel had not spoken? What wisdom did He 
reveal that was not of Gamaliel? What are His lispings to the voice of Philo? 
What cymbals did He beat that were not beaten ere ever He lived? 

I hearken to the echo from the caves into the silent valleys, and I gaze upon the 
long shadows of sunset; but I would not have this man’s heart echo the sound of 
another heart, nor would I have a shadow of the seers call himself a prophet. 

What man shall speak since Isaiah has spoken? Who dares sing since David? 
And shall wisdom be born now, after Solomon has been gathered to his fathers? 

And what of our prophets, whose tongues were swords and their lips flames? 

Left they a straw behind for this gleaner of Galilee? Or a fallen fruit for the 
beggar from the North Country? There was naught for Him save to break the 
loaf already baked by our ancestors, and to pour the wine which their holy feet 
had already passed from the grapes of old. 

It is the potter’s hand I honour not the man who buys the ware. 

I honour those who sit at the loom rather than the boor who wears the cloth. 


Who was this Jesus of Nazareth, and what is He? A man who dared not live 
His mind. Therefore He faded into oblivion and that is His end. 

I beg you, charge not my ears with His words or His deeds. My heart is 
overfull with the prophets of old, and that is enough. 


John the Beloved Disciple 
On Jesus the Word 
2 = = C) 


You would have me speak of Jesus, but how can I lure the passion-song of the 
world into a hollowed reed? 

In every aspect of the day Jesus was aware of the Father. He beheld Him in the 
clouds and in the shadows of the clouds that pass over the earth. He saw the 
Father’s face reflected in the quiet pools, and the faint print of His feet upon the 
sand; and He often closed His eyes to gaze into the Holy Eyes. 

The night spoke to Him with the voice of the Father, and in solitude He heard 
the angel of the Lord calling to Him. And when He stilled Himself to sleep He 
heard the whispering of the heavens in His dreams. 

He was often happy with us, and He would call us brothers. 

Behold, He who was the first Word called us brothers, though we were but 
syllables uttered yesterday. 

You ask why I call Him the first Word. 

Listen, and I will answer: 

In the beginning God moved in space, and out of His measureless stirring the 
earth was born and the seasons thereof. 

Then God moved again, and life streamed forth, and the longing of life sought 
the height and the depth and would have more of itself. 

Then God spoke thus, and His words were man, and man was a spirit begotten 
by God’s Spirit. 

And when God spoke thus, the Christ was His first Word and that Word was 
perfect; and when Jesus of Nazareth came to the world the first Word was 
uttered unto us and the sound was made flesh and blood. 

Jesus the Anointed was the first Word of God uttered unto man, even as if an 
apple tree in an orchard should bud and blossom a day before the other trees. 


And in God’s orchard that day was an aeon. 

We are all sons and daughters of the Most High, but the Anointed One was His 
first-born, who dwelt in the body of Jesus of Nazareth, and He walked among us 
and we beheld Him. 

All this I say that you may understand not only in the mind but rather in the 
spirit. The mind weighs and measures but it is the spirit that reaches the heart of 
life and embraces the secret; and the seed of the spirit is deathless. 

The wind may blow and then cease, and the sea shall swell and then weary, but 
the heart of life is a sphere quiet and serene, and the star that shines therein is 
fixed for evermore. 


Mannus the Pompeiian, to a Greek 
On the Semitic Deity 
> = = C) 


The Jews, like their neighbours the Phoenicians and the Arabs, will not suffer 
their gods to rest for a moment upon the wind. 

They are over-thoughtful of their deity, and over-observant of one another’s 
prayer and worship and sacrifice. 

While we Romans build marble temples to our gods, these people would 
discuss their god’s nature. When we are in ecstasy we sing and dance round the 
altars of Jupiter and Juno, of Mars and Venus; but they in their rapture wear 
sackcloth and cover their heads with ashes—and even lament the day that gave 
them birth. 

And Jesus, the man who revealed God as a being of joy, they tortured Him, 
and then put Him to death. 

These people would not be happy with a happy god. They know only the gods 
of their pain. 

Even Jesus’ friends and disciples who knew His mirth and heard His laughter, 
make an image of His sorrow, and they worship that image. 

And in such worship they rise not to their deity; they only bring their deity 
down to themselves. 

I believe however that this philosopher, Jesus, who was not unlike Socrates, 
will have power over His race and mayhap over other races. 

For we are all creatures of sadness and of small doubts. And when a man says 
to us, “Let us be joyous with the gods,” we cannot but heed his voice. Strange 
that the pain of this man has been fashioned into a rite. 

These people would discover another Adonis, a god slain in the forest, and 
they would celebrate his slaying. It is a pity they heed not His laughter. 

But let us confess, as Roman to Greek. Do even we ourselves hear the laughter 


of Socrates in the streets of Athens? Is it ever in us to forget the cup of hemlock, 
even at the theatre of Dionysus? 

Do not rather our fathers still stop at the street corners to chat of troubles and 
to have a happy moment remembering the doleful end of all our great men? 


Pontius Pilatus 
Of Eastern Rites and Cults 
(2 = = C) 


My wife spoke of Him many times ere He was brought before me, but I was not 
concerned. 

My wife is a dreamer, and she is given, like so many Roman women of her 
rank, to Eastern cults and rituals. And these cults are dangerous to the Empire; 
and when they find a path to the hearts of our women they become destructive. 

Egypt came to an end when the Hyskos of Arabia brought to her the one God 
of their desert. And Greece was overcome and fell to dust when Ashtarte and her 
seven maidens came from the Syrian shores. 

As for Jesus, I never saw the man before He was delivered up to me as a 
malefactor, as an enemy of His own nation and also of Rome. 

He was brought into the Hall of Judgment with His arms bound to His body 
with ropes. 

I was sitting upon the dais, and He walked towards me with long, firm steps; 
then He stood erect and His head was held high. 

And I cannot fathom what came over me at that moment; but it was suddenly 
my desire, though not my will, to rise and go down from the dais and fall before 
Him. 

I felt as if Caesar had entered the Hall, a man greater than even Rome herself. 

But this lasted only a moment. And then I saw simply a man who was accused 
of treason by His own people. And I was His governor and His judge. 

I questioned Him but he would not answer. He only looked at me. And in His 
look was pity, as if it were He who was my governor and my judge. 

Then there rose from without the cries of the people. But He remained silent, 
and still He was looking at me with pity in His eyes. 

And I went out upon the steps of the palace, and when the people saw me they 


ceased to cry out. And I said, “What would you with this man?” 

And they shouted as if with one throat, “We would crucify Him. He is our 
enemy and the enemy of Rome.” 

And some called out, “Did He not say He would destroy the temple? And was 
it not He who claimed the kingdom? We will have no king but Caesar.” 

Then I left them and went back into the Judgment Hall again, and I saw Him 
still standing there alone, and His head was still high. 

And I remembered what I had read that a Greek philosopher said, “The lonely 
man is the strongest man.” At that moment the Nazarene was greater than His 
race. 

And I did not feel clement towards Him. He was beyond my clemency. 

I asked Him then, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 

And He said not a word. 

And I asked Him again, “Have you not said that you are the King of the 
Jews?” 

And He looked upon me. 

Then He answered with a quiet voice, “You yourself proclaimed me king. 
Perhaps to this end I was born, and for this cause came to bear witness unto 
truth.” 

Behold a man speaking of truth at such a moment. 

In my impatience I said aloud, to myself as much as to Him, “What is truth? 
And what is truth to the guiltless when the hand of the executioner is already 
upon him?” 

Then Jesus said with power, “None shall rule the world save with the Spirit 
and truth.” 

And I asked Him saying, “Are you of the Spirit?” 

He answered, “So are you also, though you know it not.” 

And what was the Spirit and what was truth, when I, for the sake of the State, 
and they from jealousy for their ancient rites, delivered an innocent man unto 
His death? 

No man, no race, no empire would halt before a truth on its way towards self- 
fulfilment. 

And I said again, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 

And He answered, “You yourself say this. I have conquered the world ere this 
hour.” 


And this alone of all that He said was unseemly, inasmuch as only Rome has 
conquered the world. 


But now the voices of the people rose again, and the noise was greater than 
before. 


And I descended from my seat and said to Him, “Follow me.” 


And again I appeared upon the steps of the palace, and He stood there beside 
me. 

When the people saw Him they roared like the roaring thunder. And in their 
clamour I heard naught save “Crucify Him, crucify Him.” 

Then I yielded Him to the priests who had yielded Him to me and I said to 
them, “Do what you will with this just man. And if it is your desire, take with 
you soldiers of Rome to guard Him.” 


Then they took Him, and I decreed that there be written upon the cross above 
His head, “Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.” I should have said instead, 
“Jesus of Nazareth, a King.” 


And the man was stripped and flogged and crucified. 


It would have been within my power to save Him, but saving Him would have 
caused a revolution; and it is always wise for the governor of a Roman province 
not to be intolerant of the religious scruples of a conquered race. 


I believe unto this hour that the man was more than an agitator. What I decreed 
was not my will, but rather for the sake of Rome. 

Not long after, we left Syria, and from that day my wife has been a woman of 
sorrow. Sometimes even here in this garden I see a tragedy in her face. 

I am told she talks much of Jesus to other women of Rome. 


Behold, the man whose death I decreed returns from the world of shadows and 
enters into my own house. 


And within myself I ask again and again, What is truth and what is not truth? 
Can it be that the Syrian is conquering us in the quiet hours of the night? 

It should not indeed be so. 

For Rome must needs prevail against the nightmares of our wives. 


Bartholomew in Ephesus 
On Slaves and Outcasts 
2 = = C) 


The enemies of Jesus say that He addressed His appeal to slaves and outcasts, 
and would have incited them against their lords. They say that because He was 
of the lowly He invoked His own kind, yet that He sought to conceal His own 
origin. 

But let us consider the followers of Jesus, and His leadership. 

In the beginning He chose for companions few men from the North Country, 
and they were freemen. They were strong of body and bold of spirit, and in these 
past two-score years they have had the courage to face death with willingness 
and defiance. 

Think you that these men were slaves or outcasts? 

And think you that the proud princes of Lebanon and Armenia have forgotten 
their station in accepting Jesus as a prophet of God? 

Or think you the high-born men and women of Antioch and Byzantium and 
Athens and Rome could be held by the voice of a leader of slaves? 

Nay, the Nazarene was not with the servant against his master; neither was He 
with the master against his servant. He was with no man against another man. 

He was a man above men, and the streams that ran in His sinews sang together 
with passion and with might. 

If nobility lies in being protective, He was the noblest of all men. If freedom is 
in thought and word and action, He was the freest of all men. If high birth is in 
pride that yields only to love and in aloofness that is ever gentle and gracious, 
then He was of all men the highest born. 

Forget not that only the strong and the swift shall win the race and the laurels, 
and that Jesus was crowned by those who loved Him, and also by His enemies 
though they knew it not. 


Even now He is crowned every day by the priestesses of Artemis in the secret 
places of her temple. 


Matthew 
On Jesus by a Prison Wall 
(> = = C) 


Upon an evening Jesus passed by a prison that was in the Tower of David. And 
we were walking after Him. 

Of a sudden He tarried and laid His cheek against the stones of the prison wall. 
And thus He spoke: 

“Brothers of my ancient day, my heart beats with your hearts behind the bars. 
Would that you could be free in my freedom and walk with me and my 
comrades. 

“You are confined, but not alone. Many are the prisoners who walk the open 
streets. Their wings are not shorn, but like the peacock they flutter yet cannot 
fly. 

“Brothers of my second day, I shall soon visit you in your cells and yield my 
shoulder to your burden. For the innocent and the guilty are not parted, and like 
the two bones of the forearm they shall never be cleaved. 

“Brothers of this day, which is my day, you swam against the current of their 
reasoning and you were caught. They say I too shall swim against that current. 
Perhaps I shall soon be with you, a law-breaker among the law-breakers. 

“Brothers of a day not yet come, these walls shall fall down, and out of the 
stones other shapes shall be fashioned by Him whose mallet is light, and whose 
chisel is the wind, and you shall stand free in the freedom of my new day.” 

Thus spoke Jesus and He walked on, and His hand was upon the prison wall 
until He passed by the Tower of David. 


Andrew 
On Prostitutes 
(> = = C) 


The bitterness of death is less bitter than life without Him. The days were hushed 
and made still when he was silenced. Only the echo in my memory repeats His 
words. But not His voice. 

Once I heard Him say: “Go forth in your longing to the fields, and sit by the 
lilies, and you shall hear them humming in the sun. They weave not cloth for 
raiment, nor do they raise wood or stone for shelter; yet they sing. 

“He who works in the night fulfils their needs and the dew of His grace is 
upon their petals. 

“And are not you also His care who never wearies nor rests?” 

And once I heard Him say, “The birds of the sky are counted and enrolled by 
Your Father even as the hairs of your head are numbered. Not a bird shall lie at 
the archer’s feet, neither shall a hair of your head turn grey or fall into the 
emptiness of age without His will.” 

And once again He said, “I have heard you murmur in your hearts: ‘Our God 
shall be more merciful unto us, children of Abraham, than unto those who knew 
Him not in the beginning.’ 

“But I say unto you that the owner of the vineyard who calls a labourer in the 
morning to reap, and calls another at sundown, and yet renders wages to the last 
even as to the first, that man is indeed justified. Does he not pay out of his own 
purse and with his own will? 

“So shall my Father open the gate of His mansion at the knocking of the 
Gentiles even as at your knocking. For His ear heeds the new melody with the 
same love that it feels for the oft-heard song. And with a special welcome 
because it is the youngest string of His heart.” 

And once again I heard Him say, “Remember this: a thief is a man in need, a 
liar is a man in fear; the hunter who is hunted by the watchman of your night is 


also hunted by the watchman of his own darkness. 

“T would have you pity them all. 

“Should they seek your house, see that you open your door and bid them sit at 
your board. If you do not accept them you shall not be free from whatever they 
have committed.” 

And on a day I followed Him to the market-place of Jerusalem as the others 
followed Him. And He told us the parable of the prodigal son, and the parable of 
the merchant who sold all his possessions that he might buy a pearl. 

But as He was speaking the Pharisees brought into the midst of the crowd a 
woman whom they called a harlot. And they confronted Jesus and said to Him, 
“She defiled her marriage vow, and she was taken in the act.” 

And He gazed at her; and He placed His hand upon her forehead and looked 
deep into her eyes. 

Then he turned to the men who had brought her to Him, and He looked long at 
them; and He leaned down and with His finger He began to write upon the earth. 

He wrote the name of every man, and beside the name He wrote the sin that 
every man had committed. 

And as He wrote they escaped in shame into the streets. 

And ere He had finished writing only that woman and ourselves stood before 
Him. 

And again He looked into her eyes, and He said, “You have loved overmuch. 
They who brought you here loved but little. But they brought you as a snare for 
my ensnaring. 

“And now go in peace. 

“None of them is here to judge you. And if it is in your desire to be wise even 
as you are loving, then seek me; for the Son of Man will not judge you.” 

And I wondered then whether He said this to her because He Himself was not 
without sin. 

But since that day I have pondered long, and I know now that only the pure of 
heart forgive the thirst that leads to dead waters. 

And only the sure of foot can give a hand to him who stumbles. 

And again and yet again I say, the bitterness of death is less bitter than life 
without Him. 


A Rich Man 


On Possessions 
(> = = C) 


He spoke ill of rich men. And upon a day I questioned Him saying, “Sir, what 
shall I do to attain the peace of the spirit?” 

And He bade me give my possessions to the poor and follow Him. 

But He possessed nothing; therefore He knew not the assurance and the 
freedom of possessions, nor the dignity and the self-respect that lie within. 

In my household there are seven-score slaves and stewards; some labour in my 
groves and vineyards, and some direct my ships to distant isles. 

Now had I heeded Him and given my possessions to the poor, what would 
have befallen my slaves and my servants and their wives and children? They too 
would have become beggars at the gate of the city or the portico of the temple. 

Nay that good man did not fathom the secret of possessions. Because He and 
His followers lived on the bounty of others He thought all men should live 
likewise. 

Behold a contradiction and a riddle: Should rich men bestow their riches upon 
the poor, and must the poor have the cup and the loaf of the rich man ere they 
welcome him to their board? 

And must needs the holder of the tower be host to his tenants ere he calls 
himself lord of his own land? 

The ant that stores food for the winter is wiser than a grasshopper that sings 
one day and hungers another. 

Last Sabbath one of His followers said in the market-place, “At the threshold 
of heaven where Jesus may leave His sandals, no other man is worthy to lay his 
head.” 

But I ask, at the threshold of whose house that honest vagabond could have 
left His sandals? He Himself never had a house nor a threshold; and often He 


went without sandals. 


John at Patmos 


Jesus the Gracious 


Once more I would speak of Him. 

God gave me the voice and the burning lips though not the speech. 

And unworthy am I for the fuller word, yet I would summon my heart to my 
lips. 

Jesus loved me and I knew not why. 

And I loved Him because He quickened my spirit to heights beyond my 
Stature, and to depths beyond my sounding. 

Love is a sacred mystery. 

To those who love, it remains forever wordless; 

But to those who do not love, it may be but a heartless jest. 

Jesus called me and my brother when we were labouring in the field. 

I was young then and only the voice of dawn had visited my ears. 

But His voice and the trumpet of His voice was the end of my labour and the 
beginning of my passion. 

And there were naught for me then but to walk in the sun and worship the 
loveliness of the hour. 

Could you conceive a majesty too kind to be majestic? And a beauty too 
radiant to seem beautiful? 

Could you hear in your dreams a voice shy of its own rapture? 

He called me and I followed Him. 

That evening I returned to my father’s house to get my other cloak. 

And I said to my mother, “Jesus of Nazareth would have me in His company.” 

And she said, “Go His way my son, even like your brother.” 

And I accompanied Him. 


His fragrance called me and commanded me, but only to release me. 
mK OK OK 

Love is a gracious host to his guests though to the unbidden his house is a 
mirage and a mockery. 

Now you would have me explain the miracles of Jesus. 

We are all the miraculous gesture of the moment; our Lord and Master was the 
centre of that moment. 

Yet it was not in His desire that His gestures be known. 

I have heard Him say to the lame, “Rise and go home, but say not to the priest 
that I have made you whole.” 

And Jesus’ mind was not with the cripple; it was rather with the strong and the 
upright. 

His mind sought and held other minds and His complete spirit visited other 
spirits. 

And is so doing His spirit changed these minds and these spirits. 

It seemed miraculous, but with our Lord and Master it was simply like 
breathing the air of every day. 

oK OK OK 

And now let me speak of other things. 

On a day when He and I were alone walking in a field, we were both hungry, 
and we came to a wild apple tree. 

There were only two apples hanging on the bough. 

And He held the trunk of the tree with His arm and shook it, and the two 
apples fell down. 

He picked them both up and gave one to me. The other He held in His hand. 

In my hunger I ate the apple, and I ate it fast. 

Then I looked at Him and I saw that He still held the other apple in His hand. 

And He gave it to me saying, “Eat this also.” 

And I took the apple, and in my shameless hunger I ate it. 

And as we walked on I looked upon His face. 

But how shall I tell you of what I saw? 


A night where candles burn in space, 
A dream beyond our reaching; 


A noon where all shepherds are at peace and happy that their flock are 
grazing; 
An eventide, and a stillness, and a homecoming; 
Then a sleep and a dream. 
All these things I saw in His face. 
oK OK OK 
He had given me the two apples. And I knew He was hungry even as I was 


hungry. 
But I now know that in giving them to me He had been satisfied. He Himself 
ate of other fruit from another tree. 


I would tell you more of Him, but how shall I? 
When love becomes vast love becomes wordless. 
And when memory is overladen it seeks the silent deep. 


Peter 
On the Neighbour 
(2 = = C) 


Once in Capernaum my Lord and Master spoke thus: 

“Your neighbour is your other self dwelling behind a wall. In understanding, 
all walls shall fall down. 

“Who knows but that your neighbour is your better self wearing another body? 
See that you love him as you would love yourself. 

“He too is a manifestation of the Most High, whom you do not know. 

“Your neighbour is a field where the springs of your hope walk in their green 
garments, and where the winters of your desire dream of snowy heights. 

“Your neighbour is a mirror wherein you shall behold your countenance made 
beautiful by a joy which you yourself if not know, and by a sorrow you yourself 
did not share. 

“T would have you love your neighbour even as I have loved you.” 

Then I asked Him saying, “How can I love a neighbour who loves me not, and 
who covets my property? One who would steal my possessions?” 

And He answered, “When you are ploughing and your manservant is sowing 
the seed behind you, would you stop and look backward and put to flight a 
sparrow feeding upon a few of your seeds? Should you do this, you were not 
worthy of the riches of your harvest.” 

When Jesus had said this, I was ashamed and I was silent. But I was not in 
fear, for He smiled upon me. 


A Cobbler in Jerusalem 
A Neutral 
SesSssar—aed. 


I loved him not, yet I did not hate Him. I listened to Him not to hear His words 
but rather he sound of His voice; for His voice pleased me. 

All that He said was vague to my mind, but the music thereof was clear to my 
ear. 

Indeed were it not for what others have said to me of His teaching, I should 
not have known even so much as whether He was with Judea or against it. 


Suzannah of Nazareth 
Of the Youth and Manhood of Jesus 
2 = = C) 


I knew Mary the mother of Jesus, before she became the wife of Joseph the 
carpenter, when we were both still unwedded. 

In those days Mary would behold visions and hear voices, and she would 
speak of heavenly ministers who visited her dreams. 

And the people of Nazareth were mindful of her, and they observed her going 
and her coming. And they gazed upon her brows and spaces in her steps. 

But some said she was possessed. They said this because she would go only 
upon her own errands. 

I deemed her old while she was young, for there was a harvest in her 
blossoming and ripe fruit in her spring. 

She was born and reared amongst us yet she was like an alien from the North 
Country. In her eyes there was always the astonishment of one not yet familiar 
with our faces. 

And she was as haughty as Miriam of old who marched with her brothers form 
the Nile to the wilderness. 

Then Mary was betrothed to Joseph the carpenter. 

When Mary was big with Jesus she would walk among the hills and return at 
eventide with loveliness and pain in her eyes. 

And when Jesus was born I was told that Mary said to her mother, “I am but a 
tree unpruned. See you to this fruit.” Martha the midwife heard her. 

After three days I visited her. And there was wonder in her eyes, and her 
breasts heaved, and her arm was around her first-born like the shell that holds 
the pearl. 

We all loved Mary’s babe and we watched Him, for there was warmth in His 
being and He throbbed with the pace of His life. 


The seasons passed, and He became a boy full of laughter and little 
wanderings. None of us knew what He would do for He seemed always outside 
of our race. But He was never rebuked though He was venturous and over- 
daring. 

He played with the other children rather than they with Him. 

When He was twelve years old, one day He led a blind man across the brook 
to the safety of the open road. 

And in gratitude the blind man asked Him, “Little boy, who are you?” 

And He answered, “I am not a little boy. I am Jesus.” 

And the blind man said, “Who is your father?” 

And He answered, “God is my father.” 

And the blind man laughed and replied, “Well said, my little boy. But who is 
your mother?” 

And Jesus answered, “I am not your little boy. And my mother is the earth.” 


And the blind man said, “Then behold, I was led by the Son of God and the 
earth across the stream.” 


And Jesus answered, “I will lead you wherever you would go, and my eyes 
will accompany your feet.” 

And He grew like a precious palm tree in our gardens. 

When He was nineteen He was as comely as a hart, and His eyes were like 
honey and full of the surprise of day. 

And upon His mouth there was the thirst of the desert flock for the lake. 


He would walk the fields alone and our eyes would follow Him, and the eyes 
of all the maidens of Nazareth. But we were shy of Him. 


Love is forever shy of beauty, yet beauty shall forever be pursued by love. 

Then the years bade Him speak in the temple and in the gardens of Galilee. 

And at times Mary followed Him to listen to His words and to hear the sound 
of her own heart. But when He and those who loved Him went down to 
Jerusalem she would not go. 

For we at the North Country are often mocked in the streets of Jerusalem, even 
when we go carrying our offerings to the temple. 

And Mary was too proud to yield to the South Country. 


ok OOK OK 


And Jesus visited other lands in the east and in the west. We knew not what 


lands He visited, yet our hearts followed Him. 

But Mary awaited Him upon her threshold and every eventide her eyes sought 
the road for His home-coming. 

Yet upon His return she would say to us, “He is too vast to be my Son, too 
eloquent for my silent heart. How shall I claim Him?” 

It seemed to us that Mary could not believe that the plain had given birth to the 
mountain; in the whiteness of her heart she did not see that the ridge is a 
pathway to the summit. 

She knew the man, but because He was her Son she dared not know Him. 

And on a day when Jesus went to the lake to be with the fishermen she said to 
me, “What is man but this restless being that would rise from the earth, and who 
is man but a longing that desires the stars? 

“My son is a longing. He is all of us longing for the stars. 

“Did I say my son? May God forgive me. Yet in my heart I would be His 


mother.” 
ok OK OOK 


Now, it is hard to tell more of Mary and her Son, but though there shall be husks 
in my throat, and my words shall reach you like cripples on crutches, I must 
needs relate what I have seen and heard. 

It was in the youth of the year when the red anemones were upon the hills that 
Jesus called His disciples saying to them, “Come with me to Jerusalem and 
witness the slaying of the lamb for the Passover.” 

Upon the selfsame day Mary came to my door and said, “He is seeking the 
Holy City. Will you come and follow Him with me and the other women?” 

And we walked the long road behind Mary and her son till we reached 
Jerusalem. And there a company of men and women hailed us at the gate, for 
His coming had been heralded to those who loved Him. 

But upon that very night Jesus left the city with His men. 

We were told that He had gone to Bethany. 

And Mary stayed with us in the inn, awaiting His return. 

Upon the eve of the following Thursday He was caught without the walls, and 
was held prisoner. 

And when we heard He was a prisoner, Mary uttered not a word, but there 
appeared in her eyes the fulfilment of that promised pain and joy which we had 
beheld when she was but a bride in Nazareth. 


She did not weep. She only moved among us like the ghost of a mother who 
would not bewail the ghost of her son. 

We sat low upon the floor but she was erect, walking up and down the room. 

She would stand beside the window and gaze eastward, and then with the 
fingers of her two hands brush back her hair. 

At dawn she was still standing among us, like a lone banner in the wilderness 
wherein there are no hosts. 

We wept because we knew the morrow of her son; but she did not weep for 
she knew also what would befall Him. 

Her bones were of bronze and her sinews of the ancient elms, and her eyes 
were like the sky, wide and daring. 

Have you heard a thrush sing while its nest burns in the wind? 

Have you seen a woman whose sorrow is too much for tears, or a wounded 
heart that would rise beyond its own pain? 

You have not seen such a woman, for you have not stood in the presence of 
Mary; and you have not been enfolded by the Mother Invisible. 

In that still moment when the muffled hoofs of silence beat upon the breasts of 
the sleepless, John the young son of Zebedee, came and said: “Mary Mother, 
Jesus is going forth. Come, let us follow Him.” 

And Mary laid her hand upon John’s shoulder and they went out, and we 
followed them. 

When we came to the Tower of David we saw Jesus carrying His cross. And 
there was a great crowd about Him. 

And two other men were also carrying their crosses. 

And Mary’s head was held high, and she walked with us after her son. And her 
step was firm. 

And behind her walked Zion and Rome, ay, the whole world, to revenge itself 
upon one free Man. 

When we reached the hill, He was raised high upon the cross. 

And I looked at Mary. And her face was not the face of a woman bereaved. It 
was the countenance of the fertile earth, forever giving birth, forever burying her 
children. 

Then to her eyes came the remembrance of His childhood, and she said aloud, 
“My son, who is not my son; man who once visited my womb, I glory in your 
power. I know that every drop of blood that runs down from your hands shall be 


the well-stream of a nation. 

“You die in this tempest even as my heart once died in the sunset, and I shall 
now sorrow.” 

At that moment I desired to cover my face with my cloak and run away to the 
North Country. But of a sudden I heard Mary say, “My son, who is not my son, 
what have you said to the man at your right hand that has made him happy in his 
agony? The shadow of death is light upon his face, and he cannot turn his eyes 
from you. 

“Now you smile upon me, and because you smile I know you have 
conquered.” 

And Jesus looked upon His mother and said, “Mary, from this hour be you the 
mother of John.” 

And to John He said, “Be a loving son unto this woman. Go to her house and 
let your shadow cross the threshold where I once stood. Do this in remembrance 
of me.” 

And Mary raised her right hand towards Him, and she was like a tree with one 
branch. And again she cried, “My son, who is not my son, if this be of God may 
God give us patience and the knowledge thereof. And if it be of man may God 
forgive him forevermore. 

“Tf it be of God, the snow of Lebanon shall be your shroud; and if it be only of 
the priests and soldiers, then I have this garment for your nakedness. 

“My son, who is not my son, that which God builds here shall not perish; and 
that which man would destroy shall remain builded, but not in his sight.” 

And at that moment the heavens yielded Him to the earth, a cry and a breath. 

And Mary yielded Him also unto man, a wound and a balsam. 

And Mary said, “Now behold, He is gone. The battle is over. The star has 
shone forth. The ship has reached the harbour. He who once lay against my heart 
is throbbing in space.” 

And we came close to her, and she said to us, “Even in death He smiles. He 
has conquered. I would indeed be the mother of a conqueror.” 

And Mary returned to Jerusalem leaning upon John the young disciple. 

And she was a woman fulfilled. 

And when we reached the gate of the city, I gazed upon her face and I was 
astonished, for on that day the head of Jesus was the highest among men, and yet 
Mary’s head was not less high. 


All this came to pass in the spring of the year. 

And now it is autumn. And Mary the mother of Jesus has come again to her 
dwelling-place, and she is alone. 

Two Sabbaths ago my heart was as a stone in my breast, for my son had left 
me for a ship in Tyre. He would be a sailor. 

And he said he would return no more. 

And upon an evening I sought Mary. 

When I entered her house she was sitting at her loom, but she was not 
weaving. She was looking into the sky beyond Nazareth. 

And I said to her, “Hail, Mary.” 

And she stretched out her arm to me, and said, “Come and sit beside me, and 
let us watch the sun pour its blood upon the hills.” 


And I sat beside her on the bench and we gazed into the west through the 
window. 

And after a moment Mary said, “I wonder who is crucifying the sun this 
eventide.” 


Then I said, “I came to you for comfort. My son has left me for the sea and I 
am alone in the house across the way.” 


Then Mary said, “I would comfort you but how shall I?” 

And I said, “If you will only speak of your son I shall be comforted.” 

And Mary smiled upon me, and she laid her hand about my shoulder and she 
said, “I will speak of Him. That which will console you will give me 
consolation.” 

Then she spoke of Jesus, and she spoke long of all that was in the beginning. 

And it seemed to me that in her speech she would have no difference between 
her son and mine. 


For she said to me, “My son is also a seafarer. Why would you not trust your 
son to the waves even as I have trusted Him? 


“Woman shall be forever the womb and the cradle but never the tomb. We die 
that we may give life unto life even as our fingers spin the thread for the raiment 
that we shall never wear. 


“And we cast the net for the fish that we shall never taste. 
“And for this we sorrow, yet in all this is our joy.” 
Thus spoke Mary to me. 


And I left her and came to my house, and though the light of the day was spent 
I sat at my loom to weave more of the cloth. 


Joseph Surnamed Justus 
Jesus the Wayfarer 


») C 


Seasser—S 2. 


They say he was vulgar, the common off spring of common seed, a man uncouth 
and violent. 

They say that only the wind combed His hair, and only the rain brought His 
clothes and His body together. 

They deem Him mad, and they attribute His words to demons. 

Yet behold, the Man despised sounded a challenge and the sound thereof shall 
never cease. 

He sang a song and none shall arrest that melody. It shall hover from 
generation to generation and it shall rise from sphere to sphere remembering the 
lips that gave it birth and the ears that cradled it. 

He was a stranger. Aye, He was a stranger, a wayfarer on His way to a shrine, 
a visitor who knocked at our door, a guest from a far country. 

And because He found not a gracious host, He has returned to His own place. 


Philip 
And When He Died All Mankind Died 
(> = = C) 


When our beloved died, all mankind died and all things for a space were still and 
grey. Then the east was darkened, and a tempest rushed out of it and swept the 
land. The eyes of the sky opened and shut, and the rain came down in torrents 
and carried away the blood that streamed from His hands and His feet. 

I too died. But in the depth of my oblivion I heard Him speak and say, “Father 
forgive them, for they know not what they do.” 

And His voice sought my drowned spirit and I was brought back to the shore. 


And I opened my eyes and I saw His white body hanging against the cloud, 
and His words that I had heard took the shape within me and became a new man. 
And I sorrowed no more. 

Who would sorrow for a sea that is unveiling its face, or for a mountain that 
laughs in the sun? 

Was it ever in the heart of man, when that heart was pierced, to say such 
words? 

What other judge of men has released His judges? And did ever love challenge 
hate with power more certain of itself? 

Was ever such a trumpet heard ‘twixt heaven and earth? 

Was it known before that the murdered had compassion on his murderers? Or 
that the meteor stayed his footsteps for the mole? 


The seasons shall tire and the years grow old, ere they exhaust these words: 
“Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.” 


And you and I, though born again and again, shall keep them. 
And now I would go into my house, and stand an exalted beggar, at His door. 


Birbarah of Yammouni 


On Jesus the Impatient 


? C 


Seaser—S 2. 


Jesus was patient with the dullard and the stupid, even as the winter awaits the 
spring. 

He was patient like a mountain in the wind. 

He answered with kindliness the harsh questionings of His foes. 


He could even be silent to cavil and dispute, for He was strong and the strong 
can be forbearing. 


But Jesus was also impatient. 

He spared not the hypocrite. 

He yielded not to men of cunning nor to the jugglers of words. 
And He would not be governed. 


He was impatient with those who believed not in light because they 
themselves dwelt in shadow; and with those who sought after signs in the sky 
rather than in their own hearts. 


He was impatient with those who weighed and measured the day and the night 
before they would trust their dreams to dawn or eventide. 


Jesus was patient. 
Yet He was the most impatient of men. 


He would have you weave the cloth though you spend years between the loom 
and the linen. 
But He would have none tear an inch off the woven fabric. 


Pilate’s Wife to a Roman Lady 
SesaPe—S.. 


I was walking with my maidens in the groves outside of Jerusalem when I saw 
Him with a few men and women sitting about Him; and He was speaking to 
them in a language which I only half understood. 

But one needs not a language to perceive a pillar of light or a mountain of 
crystal. The heart knows what the tongue may never utter and the ears may never 
hear. 

He was speaking to His friends of love and strength. I know He spoke of love 
because there was melody in His voice; and I know He spoke of strength 
because there were armies in His gestures. And He was tender, though even my 
husband could not have spoken with such authority. 

When He saw me passing by He stopped speaking for a moment and looked 
kindly upon me. And I was humbled; and in my soul I knew I had passed by a 
god. 

After that day His image visited my privacy when I would not be visited by 
man or woman; and His eyes searched my soul when my own eyes were closed. 
And His voice governs the stillness of my nights. 

I am held fast forevermore; and there is peace in my pain, and freedom in my 
tears. 

Beloved friend, you have never seen that man, and you will never see Him. 

He is gone beyond our senses, but of all men He is now the nearest to me. 


A Man Outside of Jerusalem 
Of Judas 
2 = = C) 


Judas came to my house that Friday, upon the eve of the Passover; and he 
knocked at my door with force. 

When he entered I looked at him, and his face was ashen. His hands trembled 
like dry twigs in the wind, and his clothes were as wet as if he had stepped out 
from a river; for on that evening there were great tempests. 

He looked at me, and the sockets of his eyes were like dark caves and his eyes 
were blood-sodden. 

And he said, “I have delivered Jesus of Nazareth to His enemies and to my 
enemies.” 

Then Judas wrung his hands and he said, “Jesus declared that He would 
overcome all His foes and the foes of our people. And I believed and I followed 
Him. 

“When first He called us to Him He promised us a kingdom mighty and vast, 
and in our faith we sought His favour that we might have honourable stations in 
His court. 

“We beheld ourselves princes dealing with these Romans as they have dealt 
with us. And Jesus said much about His kingdom, and I thought He had chosen 
me a captain of His chariots, and a chief man of his warriors. And I followed His 
footsteps willingly. 

“But I found it was not a kingdom that Jesus sought, nor was it from the 
Romans He would have had us free. His kingdom was but the kingdom of the 
heart. I heard Him talk of love and charity and forgiveness, and the wayside 
women listened gladly, but my heart grew bitter and I was hardened. 

“My promised king of Judea seemed suddenly to have turned flute-player, to 
soothe the mind of wanderers and vagabonds. 


“T had loved Him as others of my tribe had loved Him. I had beheld Him a 
hope and a deliverance from the yoke of the aliens. But when He would not utter 
a word or move a hand to free us from that yoke, and when He would even have 
rendered unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s, then despair filled me and my 
hopes died. And I said, ‘He who murders my hopes shall be murdered, for my 
hopes and expectations are more precious than the life of any man’.” 

Then Judas gnashed his teeth; and he bent down his head. And when he spoke 
again, he said, “I have delivered Him up. And He was crucified this day... Yet 
when He died upon the cross, He died a king. He died in the tempest as 
deliverers die, like vast men who live beyond the shroud and the stone. 

“And all the while He was dying, He was gracious, and He was kindly; and 
His heart was full of pity. He felt pity even for me who had delivered Him up.” 

And I said, “Judas, you have committed a grave wrong.” 

And Judas answered, “But He died a king. Why did He not live a king?” 

And I said again, “You have committed a grave crime.” 

And he sat down there, upon that bench, and he was as still as a stone. 

But I walked to and fro in the room, and once more I said, “You have 
committed a great sin.” 

But Judas said not a word. He remained as silent as the earth. 

And after a while he stood up and faced me and he seemed taller, and when he 
spoke his voice was like the sound of a cracked vessel; and he said, “Sin was not 
in my heart. This very night I shall seek His kingdom, and I shall stand in His 
presence and beg His forgiveness. 

“He died a king, and I shall die a felon. But in my heart I know He will forgive 
me.” 

After saying these words he folded his wet cloak around him and he said, “It 
was good that I came to you this night even though I have brought you trouble. 
Will you also forgive me? 

“Say to your sons and to your sons’ sons: ‘Judas Iscariot delivered Jesus of 
Nazareth to His enemies because he believed Jesus was an enemy to His own 
race.’ 

“And say also that Judas upon the selfsame day of his great error followed the 
King to the steps of His throne to deliver up his own soul and to be judged. 

“T shall tell Him that my blood also was impatient for the sod, and my crippled 
spirit would be free.” 


Then Judas leaned his head back against the wall and he cried out, “O God 
whose dreaded name no man shall utter ere his lips are touched by the fingers of 
death, why did you burn me with a fire that had no light? 

“Why did you give the Galilean a passion for a land unknown and burden me 
with desire that would not escape kin or hearth? And who is this man Judas, 
whose hands are dipped in blood? 

“Lend me a hand to cast him off, an old garment and a tattered harness. 

“Help me to do this tonight. 

“And let me stand again outside of these walls. 

“T am weary of this wingless liberty. I would a larger dungeon. 

“T would flow a stream of tears to the bitter sea. I would be a man of your 
mercy rather than one knocking at the gate of his own heart.” 

Thus Judas spoke, and thereupon he opened the door and went out again into 
the tempest. 

Three days afterwards I visited Jerusalem and heard of all that had come to 
pass. And I also heard that Judas had flung himself from the summit of the High 
Rock. 

I have pondered long since that day, and I understand Judas. He fulfilled his 
little life, which hovered like a mist on this land and enslaved by the Romans, 
while the great prophet was ascending the heights. 

One man longed for a kingdom in which he was to be a prince. 

Another man desired a kingdom in which all men shall be princes. 


Sarkis, an Old Greek Shepherd Called the Madman 


Jesus and Pan 


») C 


Seasser—S 2. 


In a dream I saw Jesus and My God Pan sitting together in the heart of the 
forest. 


They laughed at each other’s speech, with the brook that ran near them, and 
the laughter of Jesus was the merrier. And they conversed long. 


Pan spoke of earth and her secrets, and of his hoofed brothers and his horned 
sisters; and of dreams. And he spoke of roots and their nestlings, and of the sap 
that wakes and rises and sings to summer. 


And Jesus told of the young shoots in the forest, and of flowers and fruit, and 
the seed that they shall bear in a season not yet come. 

He spoke of birds in space and their singing in the upper world. 

And He told of white harts in the desert wherein God shepherds them. 

And Pan was pleased with the speech of the new God, and his nostrils 
quivered. 

And in the same dream I beheld Pan and Jesus grow quiet and still in the 
stillness of the green shadows. 


And then Pan took his reeds and played to Jesus. 
The trees were shaken and the ferns trembled, and there was a fear upon me. 


And Jesus said, “Good brother, you have the glade and the rocky height in 
your reeds.” 


Then Pan gave the reeds to Jesus and said, “You play now. It is your turn.” 
And Jesus said, “These reeds are too many for my mouth. I have this flute.” 
And He took His flute and He played. 


And I heard the sound of rain in the leaves, and the singing of streams among 
the hills, and the falling of snow on the mountain-top. 
The pulse of my heart, that had once beaten with the wind, was restored again 


to the wind, and all the waves of my yesterdays were upon my shore, and I was 
again Sarkis the shepherd, and the flute of Jesus became the pipes of countless 
shepherds calling to countless flocks. 

Then Pan said to Jesus, “Your youth is more kin to the reed than my years. 
And long ere this in my stillness I have heard your song and the murmur of your 
name. 

“Your name has a goodly sound; well shall it rise with the sap to the branches, 
and well shall it run with the hoofs among the hills. 

And it is not strange to me, though my father called me not by that name. It 
was your flute that brought it back to my memory. 

“And now let us play our reeds together.” 

And they played together. 

And their music smote heaven and earth, and a terror struck all living things. 

I heard the bellow of beasts and the hunger of the forest. And I heard the cry of 
lonely men, and the plaint of those who long for what they know not. 

I heard the sighing of the maiden for her lover, and the panting of the luckless 
hunter for his prey. 

And then there came peace into their music, and the heavens and the earth 
sang together. 

All this I saw in my dream, and all this I heard. 


Annas the High Priest 
On Jesus the Rabble 
(2 = = C) 


He was of the rabble, a brigand, a mountebank and a self-trumpeter. He appealed 
only to the unclean and the disinherited, and for this He had to go the way of all 
the tainted and the defiled. 

He made sport of us and of our laws; He mocked at our honour and jeered at 
our dignity. He even said He would destroy the temple and desecrate the holy 
places. He was shameless, and for this He had to die a shameful death. 

He was a man from Galilee of the Gentiles, an alien, from the North Country 
where Adonis and Ashtarte still claim power against Israel and the God of 
Israel. 

He whose tongue halted when He spoke the speech of our prophets was loud 
and ear-splitting when he spoke the bastard language of the low-born and the 
vulgar. 

What else was there for me but to decree His death? 

Am I not a guardian of the temple? Am I not a keeper of the law? Could I have 
turned my back on Him, saying in all tranquillity: “He is a madman among 
madmen. Let Him alone to exhaust Himself raving; for the mad and the crazed 
and those possessed with devils shall be naught in the path of Israel”? 

Could I have been deaf unto Him when he called us liars, hypocrites, wolves, 
vipers, and the sons of vipers? 

Nay I could not be deaf to Him, for He was not a madman. He was self- 
possessed; and in His big-sounding sanity He denounced and challenged us all. 

For this I had Him crucified, and His crucifixion was a signal and warning 
unto the others who are stamped with the same damned seal. 

I know well I have been blamed for this, even by some of the elders in the 
Sanhedrim. But I was mindful then as I am mindful now, that one man should 


die for the people rather than the people be led astray by one man. 

Jesus was conquered by an enemy from without. I shall see that Judea is not 
conquered again, by an enemy from within. 

No man from the cursed North shall reach our Holy of Holies nor lay His 
shadow across the Ark of the Covenant. 


A Woman, One of Mary’s Neighbours 


A Lamentation 


C 


> — “. ) 


On the fortieth day after His death, all the women neighbours came to the house 
of Mary to console her and to sing threnodies. 


And one of the women sang this song: 

Whereto my Spring, whereto? 

And to what other space your perfume ascending ? 

In what other fields shall you walk? 

And to what sky shall you lift up your head to speak your heart? 


These valleys shall be barren, 

And we shall have naught but dried fields and arid. 
All green things will parch in the sun, 

And our orchards will bring forth sour apples, 
And our vineyards bitter grapes. 

We shall thirst for your wine, 

And our nostrils will long for your fragrance. 


Whereto Flower of our first spring, whereto? 

And will you return no more? 

Will not your jasmine visit us again, 

And your cyclamen stand by our wayside 

To tell us that we too have our roots deep in earth, 

And that our ceaseless breath would forever climb the sky? 


Whereto Jesus, whereto, 


Son of my neighbour Mary, 

And comrade to my son? 

Whither, our first Spring, and to what other fields ? 

Will you return to us again? 

Will you in your love-tide visit the barren shores of our dreams? 


Ahaz the Portly 
The Keeper of the Inn 
(2 = = C) 


Well do I remember the last time I saw Jesus the Nazarene. Judas had come to 
me at the noon hour of that Thursday, and bidden me prepare supper for Jesus 
and His friends. 

He gave me two silver pieces and said, “Buy all that you deem needful for the 
meal.” 

And after He was gone my wife said to me, “This is indeed a distinction.” For 
Jesus had become a prophet and He had wrought many miracles. 

At twilight He came and His followers, and they sat in the upper chamber 
around the board, but they were silent and quiet. 

Last year also and the year before they had come and then they had been 
joyous. They broke the bread and drank the wine and sang our ancient strains; 
and Jesus would talk to them till midnight. 

After that they would leave Him alone in the upper chamber and go to sleep in 
other rooms; for after midnight it was His desire to be alone. 

And He would remain awake; I would hear His steps as I lay upon my bed. 

But this last time He and His friends were not happy. 

My wife had prepared fishes from the Lake of Galilee, and pheasants from 
Houran stuffed with rice and pomegranate seeds, and I had carried them a jug of 
my cypress wine. 

And then I had left them for I felt that they wished to be alone. 

They stayed until it was full dark, and then they all descended together from 
the upper chamber, but at the foot of the stairs Jesus tarried awhile. And He 
looked at me and my wife, and He placed His hand upon the head of my 
daughter and He said, “Good night to you all. We shall come back again to your 
upper chamber, but we shall not leave you at this early hour. We shall stay until 


the sun rises above the horizon. 

“In a little while we shall return and ask for more bread and more wine. You 
and your wife have been good hosts to us, and we shall remember you when we 
come to our mansion and sit at our own board.” 

And I said, “Sir, it was an honour to serve you. The other innkeepers envy me 
because of your visits, and in my pride I smile at them in the market-place. 
Sometimes I even make a grimace.” 

And He said, “All innkeepers should be proud in serving. For he who gives 
bread and wine is the brother of him who reaps and gathers the sheaves for the 
threshing-floor, and of him who crushes the grapes at the winepress. And you are 
all kindly. You give of your bounty even to those who come with naught but 
hunger and thirst.” 

Then He turned to Judas Iscariot who kept the purse of the company, and He 
said, “Give me two shekels.” 

And Judas gave Him two shekels saying: “These are the last silver pieces in 
my purse.” 

Jesus looked at him and said, “Soon, over soon, your purse shall be filled with 
silver.” 

Then He put the two pieces into my hand and said, “With these buy a silken 
girdle for your daughter, and bid her wear it on the day of the Passover, in 
remembrance of me.” 

And looking again into the face of my daughter, He leaned down and kissed 
her brow. And then He said once more, “Good-night to you all.” 

And He walked away. 

I have been told that what He said to us has been recorded upon a parchment 
by one of His friends, but I repeat it to you even as I heard it from His own lips. 

Never shall I forget the sound of His voice as He said those words, “Good 
night to you all.” 

If you would know more of Him, ask my daughter. She is a woman now, but 
she cherishes the memory of her girlhood. And her words are more ready than 
mine. 


Barabbas 
The Last Words of Jesus 
(> = = C) 


They released me and chose Him. Then He rose and I fell down. 

And they held Him a victim and a sacrifice for the Passover. 

I was freed from my chains, and walked with the throng behind Him, but I was 
a living man going to my own grave. 

I should have fled to the desert where shame is burned out by the sun. 

Yet I walked with those who had chosen Him to bear my crime. 

When they nailed Him on His cross I stood there. 

I saw and I heard but I seemed outside of my body. 

The thief who was crucified on His right said to Him, “Are you bleeding with 
me, even you, Jesus of Nazareth?” 


And Jesus answered and said, “Were it not for this nail that stays my hand I 
would reach forth and clasp your hand. 


“We are crucified together. Would they had raised your cross nearer to mine.” 


Then He looked down and gazed upon His mother and a young man who 
stood beside her. 

He said, “Mother, behold your son standing beside you. 

“Woman, behold a man who shall carry these drops of my blood to the North 
Country.” 

And when he heard the wailing of the women of Galilee He said, “Behold, 
they weep and I thirst. 

“T am held too high to reach their tears. 

“T will not take vinegar and gall to quench this thirst.” 

Then His eyes opened wide to the sky, and He said, “Father, why hast Thou 
forsaken us?” 


And then He said in compassion, “Father, forgive them, for they know not 
what they do.” 


When He uttered those words methought I saw all men prostrated before God 
beseeching forgiveness for the crucifixion of this one man. 

Then again He said with a great voice: “Father, into Thy hand I yield back my 
spirit.” 

And at last He lifted up His head and said, “Now it is finished, but only upon 
this hill.” 

And He closed His eyes. 

Then lightning cracked the dark skies, and there was a great thunder. 

mK OK OK 

I know now that those who slew Him in my stead achieved my endless torment. 

His crucifixion endured but for an hour. 

But I shall be crucified unto the end of my years. 


Claudius, a Roman Sentinel 
Jesus the Stoic 
2 = = C) 


After he was taken, they entrusted Him to me. And I was ordered by Pontius 
Pilatus to keep Him in custody until the following morning. 

My soldiers led Him prisoner, and He was obedient to them. 

At midnight I left my wife and children and visited the arsenal. It was my habit 
to go about and see all that was well with my battalions in Jerusalem; and that 
night I visited the arsenal where He was held. 

My soldiers and some of the young Jews were making sport of Him. They had 
stripped Him of His garment, and they had put a crown of last year’s brier-thorns 
upon His head. 

They had seated Him against a pillar, and they were dancing and shouting 
before Him. 

And they had given Him a reed to hold in His hand. 

As I entered someone shouted, “Behold, O Captain, the King of the Jews.” 

I stood before Him and looked at Him, and I was ashamed. I knew not why. 

I had fought in Gallia and in Spain, and with my men I had faced death. Yet 
never had I been in fear, nor been a coward. But when I stood before that man 
and He looked at me I lost heart. It seemed as though my lips were sealed, and I 
could not utter no word. 

And straightway I left the arsenal. 

This chanced thirty years ago. My sons who were babes then are men now. 
And they are serving Caesar and Rome. 

But often in counselling them I have spoken of Him, a man facing death with 
the sap of life upon His lips, and with compassion for His slayers in His eyes. 

And now I am old. I have lived the years fully. And I think truly that neither 
Pompey nor Caesar was so great a commander as that Man of Galilee. 


For since His unresisting death an army has risen out of the earth to fight for 
Him... And He is better served by them, though dead, than ever Pompey or 
Caesar was served, though living. 


James, the Brother of the Lord 
The Last Supper 
p) = = C) 


A thousand times I have been visited by the memory of that night. And I know 
now that I shall be visited a thousand times again. 

The earth shall forget the furrows ploughed upon her breast, and a woman the 
pain and joy of childbirth, ere I shall forget that night. 

In the afternoon we had been outside the walls of Jerusalem, and Jesus had 
said, “Let us go into the city now and take supper at the inn.” 

It was dark when we reached the inn, and we were hungry. The innkeeper 
greeted us and led us to an upper chamber. 

And Jesus bade us sit around the board, but He himself remained standing, and 
His eyes rested upon us. 

And He spoke to the keeper of the inn and said, “Bring me a basin and a 
pitcher full of water, and a towel.” 

And He looked at us again and said gently, “Cast off your sandals.” 

We did not understand, but at His command we cast them off. 

Then the keeper of the inn brought the basin and the pitcher; and Jesus said, 
“Now I will wash your feet. For I must needs free your feet from the dust of the 
ancient road, and give them the freedom of the new way.” 

And we were all abashed and shy. 

Then Simon Peter stood up and said: “How shall I suffer my Master and my 
Lord to wash my feet?” 

And Jesus answered, “I will wash your feet that you may remember that he 
who serves men shall be the greatest among men.” 

Then He looked at each one of us and He said: “The Son of Man who has 
chosen you for His brethren, He whose feet were anointed yesterday with myrrh 
of Arabia and dried with a women’s hair, desires now to wash your feet.” 


And He took the basin and the pitcher and kneeled down and washed our feet, 
beginning with Judas Iscariot. 

Then He sat down with us at the board; and His face was like the dawn rising 
upon a battlefield after a night of strife and blood-shedding. 

And the keeper of the inn came with his wife, bringing food and wine. 

And though I had been hungry before Jesus knelt at my feet, now I had no 
stomach for food. And there was a flame in my throat which I would not quench 
with wine. 

Then Jesus took a loaf of bread and gave to us, saying, “Perhaps we shall not 
break bread again. Let us eat this morsel in remembrance of our days in 
Galilee.” 

And He poured wine from the jug into a cup and He drank, and gave to us, and 
He said, “Drink this in remembrance of a thirst we have known together. And 
drink it also in hope for the new vintage. When I am enfolded and am no more 
among you, and when you meet here or elsewhere, break the bread and pour the 
wine, and eat and drink even as you are doing now. Then look about you; and 
perchance you may see me sitting with you at the board.” 

After saying this He began to distribute among us morsels of fish and 
pheasant, like a bird feeding its fledglings. 

We ate little yet we were filled; and we drank but a drop, for we felt that the 
cup was like a space between this land and another land. 

Then Jesus said, “Ere we leave this board let us rise and sing the joyous hymns 
of Galilee.” 

And we rose and sang together, and His voice was above our voices, and there 
was a ringing in every word of His words. 

And He looked at our faces, each and every one, and He said, “Now I bid you 
farewell. Let us go beyond these walls. Let us go unto Gethsemane.” 

And John the Son of Zebedee said, “Master, why do you say farewell to us this 
night?” 

And Jesus said, “Let not your heart be troubled. I only leave you to prepare a 
place for you in my Father’s house. But if you shall be in need of me, I will 
come back to you. Where you call me, there I shall hear you, and wherever your 
spirit shall seek me, there I will be. 

“Forget not that thirst leads to the winepress, and hunger to the wedding-feast. 

“Tt is in your longing that you shall find the Son of Man. For longing is the 


fountain-head of ecstasy, and it is the path to the Father.” 

And John spoke again and said, “If you would indeed leave us, how shall we 
be of good cheer? And why speak you of separation?” 

And Jesus said, “The hunted stag knows the arrow of the hunter before it feels 
it in his breast; and the river is aware of the sea ere it comes to her shore. And 
the Son of Man has travelled the ways of men. 

Before another almond tree renders her blossoms to the sun, my roots shall be 
reaching into the heart of another field.” 

Then Simon Peter said: “Master, leave us not now, and deny us not the joy of 
your presence. Where you go we too will go; and wherever you abide there we 
will be also.” 

And Jesus put His hand upon Simon Peter’s shoulder, and smiled upon him, 
and He said, “Who knows but that you may deny me before this night is over, 
and leave me before I leave you?” 

Then of a sudden He said, “Now let us go hence.” 

And He left the inn and we followed Him. But when we reached the gate of 
the city, Judas of Iscariot was no longer with us. And we crossed the Valley of 
Jahannam. Jesus walked far ahead of us, and we walked close to one another. 

When He reached an olive grove he stopped and turned towards us saying, 
“Rest here for an hour.” 

The evening was cool, though it was full spring with the mulberries unfolding 
their shoots and the apple trees in bloom. And the gardens were sweet. 

Each one of us sought the trunk of a tree, and we lay down. I myself gathered 
my cloak around me and lay under a pine tree. 

But Jesus left us and walked by Himself in the olive grove. And I watched 
Him while the others slept. 

He would suddenly stand still, and again He would walk up and down. This 
He did many times. 

Then I saw Him lift His face towards the sky and outstretch His arms to east 
and west. 

Once He had said, “Heaven and earth, and hell too, are of man.” And now I 
remembered His saying, and I knew that He who was pacing the olive grove was 
heaven made man; and I bethought me that the womb of the earth is not a 
beginning nor an end, but rather a chariot, a pause; and a moment of wonder and 
surprise; and hell I saw also, in the valley called Jahannam, which lay between 


Him and the Holy City. 

And as He stood there and I lay wrapped in my garment, I heard His voice 
speaking. But He was not speaking to us. Thrice I heard Him pronounce the 
word Father. And that was all I heard. 

After a while His arms dropped down, and He stood still like a cypress tree 
between my eyes and the sky. 

At last He came over among us again, and He said to us, “Wake and rise. My 
hour has come. The world is already upon us, armed for battle.” 

And then He said, “A moment ago I heard the voice of my Father. If I see you 
not again, remember that the conqueror shall not have peace until he is 
conquered.” 

And when we had risen and come close to Him, His face was like the starry 
heaven above the desert. 

Then He kissed each one of us upon the cheek. And when His lips touched my 
cheek, they were hot, like the hand of a child in fever. 

Suddenly we heard a great noise in the distance, as of numbers, and when it 
came near it was a company of men approaching with lanterns and slaves. And 
they came in haste. 

As they reached the hedge of the grove Jesus left us and went forth and met 
them. And Judas of Iscariot was leading them. 

There were Roman soldiers with swords and spears, and men of Jerusalem 
with clubs and pickaxes. 

And Judas came up to Jesus and kissed Him. And then he said to the armed 
men, “This is the Man.” 

And Jesus said to Judas, “Judas, you were patient with me. This could have 
been yesterday.” 

Then He turned to the armed men and said: “Take me now. But see that your 
cage is large enough for these wings.” 

Then they fell upon Him and held Him, and they were all shouting. 

But we in our fear ran away and sought to escape. I ran alone through the olive 
groves, nor had I power to be mindful, nor did any voice speak in me except my 
fear. 

Through the two or three hours that remained of that night I was fleeing and 
hiding, and at dawn I found myself in a village near Jericho. 

Why had I left Him? I do not know. But to my sorrow I did leave Him. I was a 


coward and I fled from the face of His enemies. 

Then I was sick and ashamed at heart, and I returned to Jerusalem, but He was 
a prisoner, and no friend could have speech with Him. 

He was crucified, and His blood has made new clay of the earth. 

And I am living still; I am living upon the honeycomb of His sweet life. 


Simon the Cyrene 
He who Carried the Cross 
») = = C) 


I was on my way to the fields when I saw Him carrying His cross; and 
multitudes were following Him. 

Then I too walked beside Him. 

His burden stopped Him many a time, for His body was exhausted. 

Then a Roman soldier approached me, saying, “Come, you are strong and firm 
built; carry the cross of this man.” 

When I heard these words my heart swelled within me and I was grateful. 

And I carried His cross. 

It was heavy, for it was made of poplar soaked through with the rains of 
winter. 

And Jesus looked at me. And the sweat of His forehead was running down 
upon His beard. 

Again He looked at me and He said, “Do you too drink this cup? You shall 
indeed sip its rim with me to the end of time.” 


So saying He placed His hand upon my free shoulder. And we walked together 
towards the Hill of the Skull. 

But now I felt not the weight of the cross. I felt only His hand. And it was like 
the wing of a bird upon my shoulder. 

Then we reached the hill top, and there they were to crucify Him. 

And then I felt the weight of the tree. 


He uttered no word when they drove the nails into His hands and feet, nor 
made He any sound. 


And His limbs did not quiver under the hammer. 
It seemed as if His hands and feet had died and would only live again when 
bathed in blood. Yet it seemed also as if He sought the nails as the prince would 


seek the sceptre; and that He craved to be raised to the heights. 

And my heart did not think to pity Him, for I was too filled to wonder. 

Now, the man whose cross I carried has become my cross. 

Should they say to me again, “Carry the cross of this man,” I would carry it till 
my road ended at the grave. 

But I would beg Him to place His hand upon my shoulder. 


This happened many years ago; and still whenever I follow the furrow in the 
field, and in that drowsy moment before sleep, I think always of that Beloved 
Man. 


And I feel His winged hand, here, on my left shoulder. 


Cyborea 
The Mother of Judas 
(> = = C) 


My son was a good man and upright. He was tender and kind to me, and he 
loved his kin and his countrymen. And he hated our enemies, the cursed 
Romans, who wear purple cloth though they spin no thread nor sit at any loom; 
and who reap and gather where they have not ploughed nor sowed the seed. 

My son was but seventeen when he was caught shooting arrows at the Roman 
legion passing through our vineyard. 

Even at that age he would speak to the other youths of the glory of Israel, and 
he would utter many strange things that I did not understand. 

He was my son, my only son. 

He drank life from these breasts now dry, and he took his first steps in this 
garden, grasping these fingers that are now like trembling reeds. 

With these selfsame hands, young and fresh then like the grapes of Lebanon, I 
put away his first sandals in a linen kerchief that my mother had given me. I still 
keep them there in that chest, beside the window. 

He was my first-born, and when he took his first step, I too took my first step. 
For women travel not save when led by their children. 

And now they tell me he is dead by his own hand; that he flung himself from 
the High Rock in remorse because he had betrayed his friend Jesus of Nazareth. 

I know my son is dead. But I know he betrayed no one; for he loved his kin 
and hated none but the Romans. 

My son sought the glory of Israel, and naught but that glory was upon his lips 
and in his deeds. 

When he met Jesus on the highway he left me to follow Him. And in my heart 
I knew that he was wrong to follow any man. 


When he bade me farewell I told him that he was wrong, but he listened not. 


Our children do not heed us; like the high tide of today, they take no counsel 
with the high tide of yesterday. 

I beg you question me no further about my son. 

I loved him and I shall love him forevermore. 

If love were in the flesh I would burn it out with hot irons and be at peace. But 
it is in the soul, unreachable. 

And now I would speak no more. Go question another woman more honoured 
than the mother of Judas. 

Go to the mother of Jesus. The sword is in her heart also; she will tell you of 
me, and you will understand. 


The Woman of Byblos 
A Lamentation 


Weep with me, ye daughters of Ashtarte, and all ye lovers of Tamouz, Bid your 
heart melt and rise and run blood-tears, For He who was made of gold and ivory 
is no more. 

In the dark forest the boar overcame Him, And the tusks of the boar pierced 
His flesh. Now He lies stained with the leaves of yesteryear, And no longer shall 
His footsteps wake the seeds that sleep in the bosom of the spring. His voice will 
not come with the dawn to my window, And I shall be forever alone. 

Weep with me, ye daughters of Ashtarte, and all ye lovers of Tamouz, For my 
Beloved has escaped me; He who spoke as the rivers speak; He whose voice and 
time were twins; He whose mouth was a red pain made sweet; He on whose lips 
gall would turn to honey. 

Weep with me, daughters of Ashtarte, and ye lovers of Tamouz. Weep with me 
around His bier as the stars weep, And as the moon-petals fall upon His 
wounded body. Wet with your tears the silken covers of my bed, Where my 
Beloved once lay in my dream, And was gone away in my awakening. 

I charge ye, daughters of Ashtarte, and all ye lovers of Tamouz, Bare your 
breasts and weep and comfort me, For Jesus of Nazareth is dead. 


Mary Magdalen, Thirty Years Later 
On the Resurrection of the Spirit 
2 = = C) 


Once again I say that with death Jesus conquered death, and rose from the grave 
a spirit and a power. And He walked in our solitude and visited the gardens of 
our passion. 

He lies not there in that cleft rock behind the stone. 


We who love Him beheld Him with these our eyes which He made to see; and 
we touched Him with these our hands which He taught to reach forth. 


I know you who believe not in Him. I was one of you, and you are many; but 
your number shall be diminished. 


Must your break your harp and your lyre to find the music therein? 

Or must you fell a tree ere you can believe it bears fruit? 

You hate Jesus because someone from the North Country said He was the Son 
of God. But you hate one another because each of you deems himself too great 
to be the brother of the next man. 

You hate Him because someone said He was born of a virgin, and not of man’s 
seed. 

But you know not the mothers who go to the tomb in virginity, nor the men 
who go down to the grave choked with their own thirst. 

You know not that the earth was given in marriage to the sun, and that earth it 
is who sends us forth to the mountain and the desert. 

There is a gulf that yawns between those who love Him and those who hate 
Him, between those who believe and those who do not believe. 

But when the years have bridged that gulf you shall know that He who lived in 
us is deathless, that He was the Son of God even as we are the children of God; 
that He was born of a virgin even as we are born of the husbandless earth. 

It is passing strange that the earth gives not to the unbelievers the roots that 


would suck at her breast, nor the wings wherewith to fly high and drink, and be 
filled with the dews of her space. 


But I know what I know, and it is enough. 


A Man from Lebanon 


Nineteen Centuries Afterward 


2 C 


Seasser—S 2. 


Master, master singer, 


Master of words unspoken, 

Seven times was I born, and seven times have I died 
Since your last hasty visit and our brief welcome. 
And behold I live again, 

Remembering a day and a night among the hills, 
When your tide lifted us up. 

Thereafter many lands and many seas did I cross, 
And wherever I was led by saddle or sail 

Your name was prayer or argument. 

Men would bless you or curse you; 

The curse, a protest against failure, 

The blessing, a hymn of the hunter 

Who comes back from the hills 

With provision for his mate. 


Your friends are yet with us for comfort and support, 

And your enemies also, for strength and assurance. 

Your mother is with us; 

I have beheld the sheen of her face in the countenance of all mothers; 
Her hand rocks cradles with gentleness, 

Her hand folds shrouds with tenderness. 

And Mary Magdalene is yet in our midst, 


She who drank the vinegar of life, and then its wine. 

And Judas, the man of pain and small ambitions, 

He too walks the earth; 

Even now he preys upon himself when his hunger find naught else, 
And seeks his larger self in self-destruction. 


And John, he whose youth loved beauty, is here, 

And he sings though unheeded. 

And Simon Peter the impetuous, who denied you that he might live longer for 
you, 

He too sits by our fire. 

He may deny you again ere the dawn of another day, 


Yet he would be crucified for your purpose, and deem himself unworthy of the 
honour. 


And Caiaphas and Annas still live their day, 

And judge the guilty and the innocent. 

They sleep upon their feathered bed 

Whilst he whom they have judged is whipped with the rods. 


And the woman who was taken in adultery, 

She too walks the streets of our cities, 

And hungers for bread not yet baked, 

And she is alone in an empty house. 

And Pontius Pilatus is here also: 

He stands in awe before you, 

And still questions you, 

But he dares not risk his station or defy an alien race; 
And he is still washing his hands. 

Even now Jerusalem holds the basin and Rome the ewer, 
And betwixt the two thousand thousand hands would be washed to whiteness. 


Master, Master Poet, 
Master of words sung and spoken, 


They have builded temples to house your name, 
And upon every height they have raised your cross, 
A sign and a symbol to guide their wayward feet, 
But not unto your joy. 
Your joy is a hill beyond their vision, 
And it does not comfort them. 
They would honour the man unknown to them. 
And what consolation is there in a man like themselves, a man whose 
kindliness is like their own kindliness, 
A god whose love is like their own love, 
And whose mercy is in their own mercy? 
They honour not the man, the living man, 
The first man who opened His eyes and gazed at the sun 
With eyelids unquivering. 
Nay, they do not know Him, and they would not be like Him. 
mK OK OK 
They would be unknown, walking in the procession of the unknown. 
They would bear sorrow, their sorrow, 
And they would not find comfort in your joy. 
Their aching heart seeks not consolation in your words and the song thereof. 
And their pain, silent and unshapen, 
Makes them creatures lonely and unvisited. 
Though hemmed about my kin and kind, 
They live in fear, uncomraded; 
Yet they would not be alone. 
They would bend eastward when the west wind blows. 


They call you king, 

And they would be in your court. 

They pronounce you the Messiah, 

And they would themselves be anointed with the holy oil. 
Yea, they would live upon your life. 


Master, Master Singer, 

Your tears were like the showers of May, 

And your laughter like the waves of the white sea. 

When you spoke your words were the far-off whisper of their lips when those 
lips should be kindled with fire; 

You laughed for the marrow in their bones that was not yet ready for laughter; 

And you wept for their eyes that yet were dry. 

Your voice fathered their thoughts and their understanding. 

Your voice mothered their words and their breath. 


Seven times was I born and seven times have I died, 
And now I live again, and I behold you, 

The fighter among fighters, 

The poet of poets 

King above all kings, 

Aman half-naked with your road-fellows. 

Every day the bishop bends down his head 

When he pronounces your name. 

And every day the beggars say: 

“For Jesus’ sake 

Give us a penny to buy bread.” 

We call upon each other, 

But in truth we call upon you, 

Like the flood tide in the spring of our want and desire, 
And when our autumn comes, like the ebb tide. 
High or low, your name is upon our lips, 

The Master of infinite compassion. 


Master, Master of our lonely hours, 

Here and there, betwixt the cradle and the coffin, I meet your silent brothers, 
The free men, unshackled, 

Sons of your mother earth and space. 

They are like the birds of the sky, 


And like the lilies of the field. 

They live your life and think your thoughts, 

And they echo your song. 

But they are empty-handed, 

And they are not crucified with the great crucifixion, 

And therein is their pain. 

The world crucifies them every day, 

But only in little ways. 

The sky is not shaken, 

And the earth travails not with her dead. 

They are crucified and there is none to witness their agony. 
They turn their face to right and left 

And find not one to promise them a station in his kingdom. 
Yet they would be crucified again and yet again, 

That your God may be their God, 

And your Father their Father. 


Master, Master Lover, 

The Princess awaits your coming in her fragrant chamber, 
And the married unmarried woman in her cage; 

The harlot who seeks bread in the streets of her shame, 
And the nun in her cloister who has no husband; 

The childless woman too at her window, 

Where frost designs the forest on the pane, 

She finds you in that symmetry, 

And she would mother you, and be comforted. 


Master, Master Poet, 

Master of our silent desires, 

The heart of the world quivers with the throbbing of your heart, 
But it burns not with your song. 

The world sits listening to your voice in tranquil delight, 

But it rises not from its seat 


To scale the ridges of your hills. 

Man would dream your dream but he would not wake to your dawn 
Which is his greater dream. 

He would see with your vision, 

But he would not drag his heavy feet to your throne. 

Yet many have been enthroned inn your name 

And mitred with your power, 

And have turned your golden visit 

Into crowns for their head and sceptres for their hand. 


Master, Master of Light, 

Whose eye dwells in the seeking fingers of the blind, 

You are still despised and mocked, 

Aman too weak and infirm to be God, 

A God too much man to call forth adoration. 

Their mass and their hymn, 

Their sacrament and their rosary, are for their imprisoned self. 
You are their yet distant self, their far-off cry, and their passion. 


But Master, Sky-heart, Knight of our fairer dream, 
You do still tread this day; 

Nor bows nor spears shall stay your steps. 

You walk through all our arrows. 

You smile down upon us, 

And though you are the youngest of us all 

You father us all. 


Poet, Singer, Great Heart, 

May our God bless your name, 

And the womb that held you, and the breasts that gave you milk. 
And may God forgive us all. 


LAZARUS AND HIS BELOVED 


Saar. 
The Cast 

Lazarus 
Mary, his sister 
Martha, his sister 
The mother of Lazarus 
Philip, a disciple 
A Madman 

The Scene 


The garden outside of the home of Lazarus and his mother and sisters in Bethany 


Late afternoon of Monday, the day after the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth 
from the grave. 


At curtain rise: Mary is at right gazing up towards the hills. Martha is seated at 
her loom near the house door, left. The Madman is seated around the corner of 
the house, and against its wall, down left. 


The Play 


MARY : (Turning to Martha) You do not work. You have not worked much lately. 
MARTHA: You are not thinking of my work. My idleness makes you think of what 


our Master said. Oh, beloved Master! 


THE MADMAN : The day shall come when there will be no weaver, and no one to 
wear the cloth. We shall all stand naked in the sun. 


(There is a long silence. The women do not appear to have heard The 
Madman speaking. They never hear him.) 
MARY : It is getting late. 
MARTHA: Yes, yes, I know. It is getting late. 
(The mother enters, coming out from the house door.) 
MOTHER : Has he not returned yet? 
MARTHA: No, mother, he has not returned yet. 
(The three women look towards the hills.) 


THE MADMAN : He himself will never return. All that you may see is a breath 
struggling in a body. 
MARY : It seems to me that he has not yet returned from the other world. 


MOTHER: The death of our Master has afflicted him deeply, and during these last 
days he has hardly eaten a morsel, and I know at night that he does not sleep. 
Surely it must have been the death of our Friend. 


MARTHA: No, mother. There is something else; something I do not understand. 
MARY : Yes, yes. There is something else. I know it, too. I have known it all these 
days, yet I cannot explain it. His eyes are deeper. He gazes at me as though he 
were seeing someone else through me. He is tender but his tenderness is for 
someone not here. And he is silent, silent as if the seal of death is yet upon his 
lips. 

(A silence falls over the three women.) 
THE MADMAN: Everyone looks through everyone else to see someone else. 


MOTHER : (Breaking the silence) Would that he’d return. Of late he has spent too 
many hours among those hills alone. He should be here with us. 

MARY : Mother, he has not been with us for a long time. 

MARTHA: Why, he has always been with us, only those three days! 

MARY : Three days? Three days! Yes, Martha, you are right. It was only three 
days. 

MOTHER : I wish my son would return from the hills. 

MARTHA: He will come soon, mother. You must not worry. 


MARY : (in a strange voice) Sometimes I feel that he will never come back from 


the hills. 
MOTHER : If he came back from the grave, the surely he will come back from the 
hills. And oh, my daughters, to think that the One who gave us back his life was 
slain but yesterday. 
MARY : Oh the mystery of it, and the pain of it. 
MOTHER : Oh, to think that they could be so cruel to the One who gave my son 
back to my heart. 
(A silence) 
MARTHA: But Lazarus should not stay so long among the hills. 
MARY : It is easy for one in a dream to lose his way among the olive groves. And 
I know a place where Lazarus loved to sit and dream and be still. Oh, mother, it 
is beside a little stream. If you do not know the place you could not find it. He 
took me there once, and we sat on two stones, like children. It was spring, and 
little flowers were growing beside us. We often spoke of that place during the 
winter season. And each time that he spoke of that place a strange light came 
into his eyes. 
THE MADMAN: Yes, that strange light, that shadow cast by the other light. 
MARY : And mother, you know that Lazarus has always been away from us, 
though he was always with us. 
MOTHER : You say so many things I cannot understand. (Pause) I wish my son 
would come back from the hills. I wish he would come back! (Pause) I must go 
in now. The lentils must not be overcooked. 
(The mother exits through the door) 
MARTHA: I wish I could understand all that you say, Mary. When you speak it is 
as though someone else is speaking. 
MARY : (Her voice a little strange) I know, my sister, I know. Whenever we speak 
it is someone else who is speaking. 
(There is a prolonged silence. Mary is faraway in her thoughts, and Martha 
watches her half-curiously. Lazarus enters, coming from the hills, back left. 
He throws himself upon the grass under the almond trees near the house.) 
MARY : (Running toward him) Oh Lazarus, you are tired and weary. You should 
not have walked so far. 
LAZARUS : (Speaking absently) Walking, walking and going nowhere; seeking 
and finding nothing. But it is better to be among the hills. 
THE MADMAN: Well, after all it is a cubit nearer to the other hills. 


MARTHA: (After brief silence) But you are not well, and you leave us all day long, 
and we are much concerned. What you came back, Lazarus, you made us happy. 
But in leaving us alone here you turn our happiness into anxiety. 
LAZARUS : (Turning his face toward the hills) Did I leave you long this day? 
Strange that you should call a moment among the hills a separation. Did I truly 
stay more that a moment among the hills? 
MARTHA: You have been gone all day. 
LAZARUS : To think, to think! A whole day among the hills! Who would believe 
it? 

(A silence. The mother enters, coming out from the house door.) 
MOTHER : Oh, my son, I am glad you have come back. It is late and the mist is 
gathering upon the hills. I feared for you my son. 
THE MADMAN: They are afraid of the mist. And the mist is their beginning and the 
mist is their end. 
LAZARUS: Yes, I have come back to you from the hills. The pity of it, the pity of 
it all. 
MOTHER : What is it Lazarus? What is the pity of it all? 
LAZARUS : Nothing, mother. Nothing. 
MOTHER : You speak strangely. I do not understand you, Lazarus. You have said 
little since your home-coming. But whatever you have said has been strange to 
me. 
MARTHA: Yes, strange. 

(There is a pause.) 

MOTHER : And now the mist is gathering here. Let us go into the house. Come, 
my children. 

(The mother, after kissing Lazarus with wistful tenderness, enters the house.) 
MARTHA : Yes, there is a chill in the air. I must take my loom and my linen 
indoors. 

MARY : (Sitting down beside Lazarus on the grass under the almond trees, and 
speaking to Martha) It is true the April evenings are not good for either your 
loom or your linen. Would you want me to help you take your loom indoors? 
MARTHA: No, no. I can do it alone. I have always done it alone. 
(Martha carries her loom into the house, then she returns for the linen, 
taking that in also. A wind passes by, shaking the almond tree, and a drift of 
petals falls over Mary and Lazarus.) 


LAZARUS : Even spring would comfort us, and even the trees would weep for us. 
All there is on earth, if all there is on earth could know our downfall and our 
grief, would pity us and weep for us. 

MARY : But spring is with us, and though veiled with the veil of sorrow, yet it is 
spring. Let us not speak of pity. Let us rather accept both our spring and our 
sorrow with gratitude. And let us wonder in sweet silence at Him who gave you 
life yet yielded His own life. Let us not speak of pity, Lazarus. 

LAZARUS : Pity, pity that I should be torn away from a thousand thousand years of 
heart’s desire, a thousand thousand years of heart’s hunger. Pity that after a 
thousand thousand springs I am turned to this winter. 

MARY : What do you mean, my brother? Why do you speak of a thousand 
thousand springs? You were but three days away from us. Three short days. But 
our sorrow was indeed longer than three days. 

LAZARUS : Three days? Three centuries, three aeons! All of time! All of time with 
the one my soul loved before time began. 

THE MADMAN : Yes, three days, three centuries, three aeons. Strange they would 
always weigh and measure. It is always a sundial and a pair of scales. 

MARY : (In amazement) The one you soul loved before time began? Lazarus, why 
do you say these things? It is but a dream you dreamed in another garden. Now 
we are here in this garden, a stone’s throw from Jerusalem. We are here. And 
you know well, my brother, that our Master would have you be with us in this 
awakening to dream of life and love; and He would have you an ardent disciple, 
a living witness of His glory. 

LAZARUS : There is no dream here and there is no awakening. You and I and this 
garden are but an illusion, a shadow of the real. The awakening is there where I 
was with my beloved and the reality. 

MARY : (Rising) Your beloved? 

LAZARUS: (Also rising) My beloved. 

THE MADMAN: Yes, yes. His beloved, the space virgin, the beloved of everyman. 
MARY : But where is your beloved? Who is your beloved? 

LAZARUS : My twin heart whom I sought here and did not find. Then death, the 
angel with winged feet, came and led my longing to her longing, and I lived with 
her in the very heart of God. And I became nearer to her and she to me, and we 
were one. We were a sphere that shines in the sun; and we were a song among 
the stars. All this, Mary, all this and more, till a voice, a voice from the depths, 
the voice of a world called me; and that which was inseparable was torn asunder. 


And the thousand thousand years with my beloved in space could not guard me 
from the power of that voice which called me back. 

MARY : (Looking unto the sky) O blessed angels of our silent hours, make me to 
understand this thing! I would not be an alien in this new land discovered by 
death. Say more, my brother, go on. I believe in my heart I can follow you. 

THE MADMAN : Follow him, if you can, little woman. Shall the turtle follow the 
stag? 

LAZARUS : I was a stream and I sought the sea where my beloved dwells, and 
when I reached the sea I was brought to the hills to run again among the rocks. I 
was a song imprisoned in silence, longing for the heart of my beloved, and when 
the winds of heaven released me and uttered me in that green forest I was 
recaptured by a voice, and I was turned again into silence. I was a root in the 
dark earth, and I became a flower and then a fragrance in space rising to enfold 
my beloved, and I was caught and gathered by hand, and I was made a root 
again, a root in the dark earth. 

THE MADMAN : If you are a root you can always escape the tempests in the 
branches. And it is good to be a running stream even after you have reached the 
sea. Of course it is good for water to run upward. 

MARY : (To herself) Oh strange, passing strange! (To Lazarus) But my brother it is 
good to be a running stream, and it is not good to be a song not yet sung, and it is 
good to be a root in the dark earth. The Master knew all this and He called you 
back to us that we may know there is no veil between life and death. Do you not 
see how one word uttered in love may bring together elements scattered by an 
illusion called death? Believe and have faith, for only in faith, which is our 
deeper knowledge, can you find comfort. 

LAZARUS : Comfort! Comfort the treacherous, the deadly! Comfort that cheats our 
senses and makes us slaves to the passing hour! I would not have comfort. I 
would have passion! I would burn in the cool space with my beloved. I would be 
in the boundless space with my mate, my other self. O Mary, Mary, you were 
once my sister, and we knew one another even when our nearest kin knew us 
not. Now listen to me, listen to me with your heart. 

MARY : I am listening, Lazarus. 

THE MADMAN : Let the whole world listen. The sky will now speak to the earth, 
but the earth is deaf as you and I. 

LAZARUS : We were in space, my beloved and I, and we were all space. We were 
in light and we were all light. And we roamed even like the ancient spirit that 


moved upon the face of the waters; and it was forever the first day. We were love 
itself that dwells in the heart of the white silence. Then a voice like thunder, a 
voice like countless spears piercing the ether, cried out saying, “Lazarus, come 
forth!” And the voice echoed and re-echoed in space, and I, even as a flood tide 
became an ebbing tide; a house divided, a garment rent, a youth unspent, a tower 
that fell down, and out of its broken stones a landmark was made. A voice cried 
“Lazarus, come forth!” and I descended from the mansion of the sky to a tomb 
within a tomb, this body in a sealed cave. 
THE MADMAN : Master of the caravan, where are your camels and where are your 
men? Was it the hungry earth that swallowed them? Was it the simoom that 
shrouded them with sand? No! Jesus of Nazareth raised His hand, Jesus of 
Nazareth uttered a word; and tell me now, where are your camels and where are 
your men, and where are your treasures? In the trackless sand, in the trackless 
sand. But the moon will always come again. 
MARY : Oh, it is like a dream dreamt upon a mountaintop. I know, my brother, I 
know the world you have visited, though I have never seen it. Yet all that you 
say is passing strange. It is a tale told by someone across a valley, and I can 
hardly hear it. 
LAZARUS : It is all so different across the valley. There is no weight there and 
there is no measure. You are with your beloved. 

(A silence) 
LAZARUS : O my beloved! O my beloved fragrance in space! Wings that were 
spread for me! Tell me, tell me in the stillness of my heart, do you seek me, and 
was it pain to you to be separated from me? Was I also a fragrance and wings 
spread in space? And tell me now, my beloved, was there a double cruelty, was 
there a brother of His in another world who called you from life to death, and 
had you a mother and sisters and friends who deemed it a miracle? Was there a 
double cruelty performed in blessedness? 
MARY : No, no, my brother. There is only one Jesus of one world. All else is but a 
dream, even as your beloved. 
LAZARUS : (With great passion) No, no! If He is not a dream then He is nothing. 
If He had not known what is beyond Jerusalem, then He is nothing. If He did not 
know my beloved in space then He was not the Master. O my friend Jesus, you 
once gave me a cup of wine across the table, and you said, “Drink this in 
remembrance of me.” And you dipped a morsel of bread in the oil, and you said, 
“Fat this, it is my share of the loaf.” O my friend, you have put your arm on my 


shoulder and called me “son.” My mother and my sisters have said in their 
hearts, “He loves our Lazarus.” And I loved you. And then you went away to 
build more towers in the sky, and I went to my beloved. Tell me now, tell me, 
why did you bring me back? Did you not know in your knowing heart that I was 
with my beloved? Did you not meet her in you wandering above the summits of 
Lebanon? Surely you saw her image in my eyes when I came and stood before 
you at the door of the tomb. And have you not a beloved in the sun? And would 
you have a greater one than yourself separate you from her? And after separation 
what would you say? What shall I say to you now? 
THE MADMAN : He bade me also to come back but I did not obey, and now they 
call me mad. 
MARY : Lazarus, Have I a beloved in the sky? Has my longing created a being 
beyond this world? And must I die to be with him? Oh, my brother, tell me, have 
I a mate also? If this thing be so, how good it is to live and die, and live and die 
again; if a beloved awaits me, to fulfil all that I am, and I to fulfil all that he is! 
THE MADMAN : Every woman has a beloved in the sky. The heart of everywoman 
creates a being in space. 
MARY : (Repeating softly as if to herself) Have I a beloved in the sky? 
LAZARUS : I do not know. But if you had a beloved, another self, somewhere, 
some when, and you should meet him, surely there would not be one to separate 
you from him. 
THE MADMAN : He may be here, and He may call her. But like many others she 
may not hear. 
LAZARUS : (Coming to the centre of stage) To wait, to wait for each season to 
overcome another season; and then to wait for that season to be overcome by 
another; to watch all things ending before your own end comes-your end which 
is your beginning. To listen to all voices, and to know that they melt to silence, 
all save the voice of your heart that would cry even in sleep. 
THE MADMAN: The children of God married the children of men. Then they were 
divorced. Now, the children of men long for the children of God. I pity them all, 
the children of men and the children of God. 

(A silence) 
MARTHA : (Appearing in the doorway) Why don’t you come into the house, 
Lazarus? Our mother has’ prepared the supper. (With a__ little 
impatience) Whenever you and Mary are together you talk and talk, and no one 
knows what you Say. 


(Martha stands for a sew seconds, then goes into the house.) 
LAZARUS : (Speaking to himself, and as though he has not heard Martha) Oh, I 
am spent. I am wasted, I am hungry and I am thirsty. Would that you could give 
me some bread and some wine. 
MARY : (Going to him and putting her arm around him) I will, I will, my brother. 
But some into the house. Our mother has prepared the evening meal. 
THE MADMAN : He asks for bread which they cannot bake, and wine for which 
they have no bottles. 
LAZARUS : Did I say I was hungry and thirsty? I am not hungry for your bread, 
nor thirsty for your wine. I tell you I shall not enter a house until my beloved’s 
hand is upon the latch of the door. I shall not sit at the feast till she be at my 
side. 
(Mother peers from the house door.) 
MOTHER : Now, Lazarus, why do you stay out in the mist? And you, Mary, why 
do you not come into the house? I have lit the candles and the food is upon the 
board, and yet you will stay out babbling and chewing your words in the dark. 
LAZARUS : Mine own mother would have me enter a tomb. She would have me 
eat and drink and she would even bid me sit among shrouded faces and receive 
eternity from withered hands and draw life from clay cups. 
THE MADMAN : White bird that flew southward where the sun loves all things, 
what held you in mid-air, and who brought you back? It was your friend, Jesus 
of Nazareth. He brought you back out of pity for the wingless who would not be 
along. Oh, white bird, it is cold here, and you shiver and the North wind laughs 
in your feathers. 
LAZARUS : You would be in a house and under a roof. You would be within four 
walls, with a door and a window. You would be here, and you are without vision. 
Your mind is here, and my spirit is there. All of you is upon the earth; all of me 
is in space. You creep into houses, and I flew beyond upon the mountaintop. You 
are all slaves, the one to the other, and you worship but yourselves. You sleep 
and you dream not; you wake but you walk not among the hills. And yesterday I 
was weary of you and of lives, and I sought the other world which you call 
death, and if I had died it was out of longing. Now, I stand here at this moment, 
rebelling against that which you call life. 
MARTHA : (Who has come out of the house while Lazarus was speaking) But the 
Master saw our sorrow and our pain, and He called you back to us, and yet you 
rebel. Oh, what cloth, rebelling against its own weaver! What a house rebelling 


against its own builder! 

MARY : He knew our hearts and He was gracious unto us, and when He met our 
mother and saw in her eyes a dead son, buried, then her sorrow held Him, and 
for a moment He was still, and He was silent. (Pause) Then we followed Him to 
your tomb. 

LAZARUS : Yes, it was my mother’s sorrow, and your sorrow. It was pity, self-pity, 
that brought me back. How selfish is self-pity, and how deep. I say that I rebel. I 
say that divinity itself should not turn spring to winter. I had climbed the hills in 
longing, and your sorrow brought me back to this valley. You wanted a son and a 
brother to be with you through life. Your neighbours wanted a miracle. You and 
your neighbours, like your fathers and your forefathers, would have a miracle, 
that you may believe in the simplest things in life. How cruel you are and how 
hard are your hearts, and how dark is the night of your eyes. For that you bring 
down the prophets from their glory to you joys, and then you kill the prophets. 
MARTHA : (with reproof) You call our sorrow self-pity. What is your wailing but 
self-pity? Be quiet, and accept the life the Master has given you. 

LAZARUS : He did not give me life, He gave you my life. He took my life from 
my own beloved, and gave it to you, a miracle to open your eyes and your ears. 
He sacrificed me even as He sacrificed Himself. (Speaking unto the sky) Father, 
forgive them. They know not what they do. 

MARY : (In awe) It was He who said those very words, hanging upon the cross. 
LAZARUS : Yes, He said these words for me as for Himself, and for all the 
unknown who understand and are not understood. Did He not say these words 
when your tears begged Him for my life? It was your desire and not His will that 
bade His spirit to stand at the sealed door and urge eternity to yield me unto you. 
It was the ancient longing for a son and a brother that brought me back. 

MOTHER : (Approaches him and puts her arm around his shoulders) Lazarus, you 
were ever an obedient son and a loving son. What has happened to you? Be with 
us, and forget all that troubles you. 

LAZARUS : (Raising his hand) My mother and my brothers and my sisters are 
those who hear my words. 

MARY : These are also His words. 

LAZARUS : Yes, and He said these words for me as well as for Himself, and for all 
those who have earth for mother, and sky for father, and for all those who are 
born free of a people and a country and a race. 

THE MADMAN : Captain of my ship, the wind filled your sails, and you dared the 


sea; and you sought the blessed isles. What other wind changed your course, and 
why did you return to these shores? It was Jesus of Nazareth who commanded 
the wind with a breath of His own breath, and then filled the sail where it was 
empty, and emptied it where it was full. 
LAZARUS : (Suddenly he forgets them all, and he raises his head, and opens his 
arms.) O my beloved! There was dawn in your eyes, and in that dawn there was 
the silent mystery of a deep night, and the silent promise of a full day, and I was 
fulfilled, and I was whole. O my beloved, this life, this veil, is between us now. 
Must I live this death and die again that I may live again? Must needs linger until 
all these green things turn yellow and then naked again, and yet 
again? (Pause) Oh, I cannot curse Him. But why, of all men, why should I 
return? Why should I of all shepherds be driven back into the desert after the 
green pasture? 
THE MADMAN : If you were one of those who would curse, you would not have 
died so young. 
LAZARUS : Jesus of Nazareth, tell me now, why did you do this to me? Was it fair 
that I should be laid down, a humble lowly sorrowful stone leading to the height 
of your glory? Any one of the dead might have served to glorify you. Why have 
you separated this lover from his beloved? Why did you call me to a world 
which you knew in your heart you would leave? (Then crying with a great voice) 
Why—why—why did you call me from the living heart of eternity to this living 
death? O Jesus of Nazareth—I cannot curse you! I cannot curse you. I would 
bless you. (Silence. Lazarus becomes as one whose strength has gone out in a 
stream. His head falls forward almost upon his breast. After a moment of awful 
silence, he raises his head again, and with a transfigured face he cries in a deep 
and thrilling voice.) Jesus of Narareth! My friend! We have both been crucified. 
Forgive me! Forgive me. I bless you-now, and forevermore. 

(At this moment the disciple appears running from the direction of the hills.) 
MARY : Philip! 
PHILIP : He is risen! The Master is risen from the dead and now He is gone to 
Galilee. 
THE MADMAN: He is risen, but He will be crucified again a thousand times. 
MARY : Philip, my friend, what do you say? 
MARTHA : (Rushes toward the disciple, and grasps him by the arms) How glad I 
am to see you again. But who has risen? Of whom are you speaking? 
MOTHER : (Walking toward him) Come in, my son. You shall have supper with us 


tonight. 
PHILIP : (Unmoved by any of their words) I say the Master has risen from the dead 
and has gone into Galilee. 
(A deep silence falls.) 
LAZARUS : Now you shall all listen to me. If He has risen from the dead they will 
crucify Him again, but they shall not crucify Him alone. Now I shall proclaim 
Him, and they shall crucify me also. 
(He turns in exaltation and walk in the direction of the hills.) 
LAZARUS : My mother and my sisters, I shall follow Him who gave me life until 
He gives me death. Yes, I too would be crucified, and that crucifixion will end 
this crucifixion. 
(A silence) 
LAZARUS : Now I shall seek His spirit, and I shall be released. And though they 
bind me in iron chains I shall not be bound. And though a thousand mothers and 
a thousand thousand sisters shall hold my garments I shall not be held. I shall go 
with the East wind where the East wind goes. And I shall seek my beloved in the 
sunset where all our days find peace. And I shall seek my beloved in the night 
where all the mornings sleep. And I shall be the one man among all men who 
twice suffered life, and twice death, and twice knew eternity. 
(Lazarus looks into the face of his mother, then into the faces of his sisters, 
the at Philip’s face; then again at his mother’s face. Then as if he were a 
sleepwalker he turns and runs toward the hills. He disappears. They are all 
dazed and shaken.) 
MOTHER : My son, my son, come back to me! 
MARY : My brother, where are you going? Oh come, my brother, come back to 
us. 
MARTHA: (As if to herself) It is so dark I know that he will lose his way. 
MOTHER : (Almost screaming) Lazarus, my son! 


(A silence) 
PHILIP : He has gone where we all shall go. And he shall not return. 
MOTHER : (Going to the very back of the stage, close to where he has 
disappeared) Lazarus, Lazarus, my son! Come back to me! (She shrieks.) 
(There is a silence. The running steps of Lazarus are lost in the distance.) 


THE MADMAN : Now he is gone, and he is beyond your reach. And now your 
sorrow must seek another. (He pauses) Poor, poor Lazarus, the first of the 


martyrs, and the greatest of them all. 


THE MADMAN—HIS PARABLES AND POEMS 


Introduction 


You ask me how I became a madman. It happened thus: One day, long before 
many gods were born, I woke from a deep sleep and found all my masks were 
stolen,—the seven masks I have fashioned and worn in seven lives,—I ran 
maskless through the crowded streets shouting, “Thieves, thieves, the cursed 
thieves.” 

Men and women laughed at me and some ran to their houses in fear of me. 

And when I reached the market place, a youth standing on a house-top cried, 
“He is amadman.” I looked up to behold him; the sun kissed my own naked face 
for the first time. For the first time the sun kissed my own naked face and my 
soul was inflamed with love for the sun, and I wanted my masks no more. And 
as if in a trance I cried, “Blessed, blessed are the thieves who stole my masks.” 

Thus I became a madman. 

And I have found both freedom of loneliness and the safety from being 
understood, for those who understand us enslave something in us. 

But let me not be too proud of my safety. Even a Thief in a jail is safe from 
another thief. 


God 


In the ancient days, when the first quiver of speech came to my lips, I ascended 
the holy mountain and spoke unto God, saying, “Master, I am thy slave. Thy 
hidden will is my law and I shall obey thee for ever more.” 

But God made no answer, and like a mighty tempest passed away. 

And after a thousand years I ascended the holy mountain and again spoke unto 
God, saying, “Creator, I am thy creation. Out of clay hast thou fashioned me and 
to thee I owe mine all.” 

And God made no answer, but like a thousand swift wings passed away. 

And after a thousand years I climbed the holy mountain and spoke unto God 
again, saying, “Father, I am thy son. In pity and love thou hast given me birth, 
and through love and worship I shall inherit thy kingdom.” 

And God made no answer, and like the mist that veils the distant hills he 
passed away. 

And after a thousand years I climbed the sacred mountain and again spoke 
unto God, saying, “My God, my aim and my fulfillment; I am thy yesterday and 
thou are my tomorrow. I am thy root in the earth and thou art my flower in the 
sky, and together we grow before the face of the sun.” 

Then God leaned over me, and in my ears whispered words of sweetness, and 
even as the sea that enfoldeth a brook that runneth down to her, he enfolded me. 

And when I descended to the valleys and the plains God was there also. 


My Friend 
(2 — = C) 


My friend, I am not what I seem. Seeming is but a garment I wear—a care- 
woven garment that protects me from thy questionings and thee from my 
negligence. 

The “I” in me, my friend, dwells in the house of silence, and therein it shall 
remain forever more, unperceived, unapproachable. 

I would not have thee believe in what I say nor trust in what I do—for my 
words are naught but thy own thoughts in sound and my deeds thy own hopes in 
action. 

When thou sayest, “The wind bloweth eastward,” I say, “Aye it doth blow 
eastward”; for I would not have thee know that my mind doth not dwell upon the 
wind but upon the sea. 

Thou canst not understand my seafaring thoughts, nor would I have thee 
understand. I would be at sea alone. 

When it is day with thee, my friend, it is night with me; yet even then I speak 
of the noontide that dances upon the hills and of the purple shadow that steals its 
way across the valley; for thou canst not hear the songs of my darkness nor see 
my wings beating against the stars—and I fain would not have thee hear or see. I 
would be with night alone. 

When thou ascendest to thy Heaven I descend to my Hell—even then thou 
callest to me across the unbridgeable gulf, “My companion, my comrade,” and I 
call back to thee, “My comrade, my companion”—for I would not have thee see 
my Hell. The flame would burn thy eyesight and the smoke would crowd thy 
nostrils. And I love my Hell too well to have thee visit it. I would be in Hell 
alone. 

Thou lovest Truth and Beauty and Righteousness; and I for thy sake say it is 
well and seemly to love these things. But in my heart I laught at thy love. Yet I 
would not have thee see my laughter. I would laugh alone. 


My friend, thou art good and cautious and wise; nay, thou art perfect—and I, 
too, speak with thee wisely and cautiously. And yet I am mad. But I mask my 
madness. I would be mad alone. 

My friend, thou art not my friend, but how shall I make thee understand? My 
path is not thy path, yet together we walk, hand in hand. 


The Scarecrow 


Once I said to a scarecrow, “You must be tired of standing in this lonely field.” 

And he said, “The joy of scaring is a deep and lasting one, and I never tire of 
it.” 

Said I, after a minute of thought, “It is true; for I too have known that joy.” 

Said he, “Only those who are stuffed with straw can know it.” 

Then I left him, not knowing whether he had complimented or belittled me. 

A year passed, during which the scarecrow turned philosopher. 

And when I passed by him again I saw two crows building a nest under his 
hat. 


The Sleep-Walkers 


In the town where I was born lived a woman and her daughter, who walked in 
their sleep. 

One night, while silence enfolded the world, the woman and her daughter, 
walking, yet asleep, met in their mist-veiled garden. 

And the mother spoke, and she said: “At last, at last, my enemy! You by whom 
my youth was destroyed—who have built up your life upon the ruins of mine! 
Would I could kill you!” 

And the daughter spoke, and she said: “O hateful woman, selfish and old! 
Who stand between my freer self and me! Who would have my life an echo of 
your own faded life! Would you were dead!” 

At that moment a cock crew, and both women awoke. The mother said gently, 
“Ts that you, darling?” And the daughter answered gently, “Yes, dear.” 


The Wise Do 
Ses, 


One day there passed by a company of cats a wise dog. 

And as he came near and saw that they were very intent and heeded him not, 
he stopped. 

Then there arose in the midst of the company a large, grave cat and looked 
upon them and said, “Brethren, pray ye; and when ye have prayed again and yet 
again, nothing doubting, verily then it shall rain mice.” 

And when the dog heard this he laughed in his heart and turned from them 
saying, “O blind and foolish cats, has it not been written and have I not known 
and my fathers before me, that that which raineth for prayer and faith and 
supplication is not mice but bones.” 


The Two Hermits 
( = = C) 


Upon a lonely mountain, there lived two hermits who worshipped God and loved 
one another. 

Now these two hermits had one earthen bowl, and this was their only 
possession. 

One day an evil spirit entered into the heart of the older hermit and he came to 
the younger and said, “It is long that we have lived together. The time has come 
for us to part. Let us divide our possessions.” 

Then the younger hermit was saddened and he said, “It grieves me, Brother, 
that thou shouldst leave me. But if thou must needs go, so be it,” and he brought 
the earthen bowl and gave it to him saying, “We cannot divide it, Brother, let it 
be thine.” 

Then the older hermit said, “Charity I will not accept. I will take nothing but 
mine own. It must be divided.” 

And the younger one said, “If the bowl be broken, of what use would it be to 
thee or to me? If it be thy pleasure let us rather cast a lot.” 

But the older hermit said again, “I will have but justice and mine own, and I 
will not trust justice and mine own to vain chance. The bowl must be divided.” 

Then the younger hermit could reason no further and he said, “If it be indeed 
thy will, and if even so thou wouldst have it let us now break the bowl.” 

But the face of the older hermit grew exceedingly dark, and he cried, “O thou 
cursed coward, thou wouldst not fight.” 


On Giving and Taking 
Sesare—S. 


Once there lived a man who had a valley-full of needles. And one day the 
mother of Jesus came to him and said: “Friend, my son’s garment is torn and I 
must needs mend it before he goeth to the temple. Wouldst thou not give me a 
needle?” 

And he gave her not a needle, but he gave her a learned discourse on Giving 
and Taking to carry to her son before he should go to the temple. 


The Seven Selves 
© — ~<a C) 


In the stillest hour of the night, as I lay half asleep, my seven selves sat together 
and thus conversed in whisper: 

First Self: Here, in this madman, I have dwelt all these years, with naught to 
do but renew his pain by day and recreate his sorrow by night. I can bear my fate 
no longer, and now I rebel. 

Second Self: Yours is a better lot than mine, brother, for it is given to me to be 
this madman’s joyous self. I laugh his laughter and sing his happy hours, and 
with thrice winged feet I dance his brighter thoughts. It is I that would rebel 
against my weary existence. 

Third Self: And what of me, the love-ridden self, the flaming brand of wild 
passion and fantastic desires? It is I the love-sick self who would rebel against 
this madman. 

Fourth Self: I, amongst you all, am the most miserable, for naught was given 
me but odious hatred and destructive loathing. It is I, the tempest-like self, the 
one born in the black caves of Hell, who would protest against serving this 
madman. 

Fifth Self: Nay, it is I, the thinking self, the fanciful self, the self of hunger and 
thirst, the one doomed to wander without rest in search of unknown things and 
things not yet created; it is I, not you, who would rebel. 

Sixth Self: And I, the working self, the pitiful labourer, who, with patient 
hands, and longing eyes, fashion the days into images and give the formless 
elements new and eternal forms—it is I, the solitary one, who would rebel 
against this restless madman. 

Seventh Self: How strange that you all would rebel against this man, because 
each and every one of you has a preordained fate to fulfill. Ah! Could I but be 
like one of you, a self with a determined lot! But I have none, I am the do- 
nothing self, the one who sits in the dumb, empty nowhere and nowhen, while 


you are busy re-creating life. Is it you or I, neighbours, who should rebel? 

When the seventh self thus spake the other six selves looked with pity upon 
him but said nothing more; and as the night grew deeper one after the other went 
to sleep enfolded with a new and happy submission. 

But the seventh self remained watching and gazing at nothingness, which is 
behind all things. 


War 


One night a feast was held in the palace, and there came a man and prostrated 
himself before the prince, and all the feasters looked upon him; and they saw 
that one of his eyes was out and that the empty socket bled. And the prince 
inquired of him, “What has befallen you?” And the man replied, “O prince, I am 
by profession a thief, and this night, because there was no moon, I went to rob 
the money-changer’s shop, and as I climbed in through the window I made a 
mistake and entered the weaver’s shop, and in the dark I ran into the weaver’s 
loom and my eye was plucked out. And now, O prince, I ask for justice upon the 
weaver.” 

Then the prince sent for the weaver and he came, and it was decreed that one 
of his eyes should be plucked out. 

“O prince,” said the weaver, “the decree is just. It is right that one of my eyes 
be taken. And yet, alas! Both are necessary to me in order that I may see the two 
sides of the cloth that I weave. But I have a neighbour, a cobbler, who has also 
two eyes, and in his trade both eyes are not necessary.” 

Then the prince sent for the cobbler. And he came. And they took out one of 
the cobbler’s two eyes. 

And justice was satisfied. 


The Fox 
SesSssar—ae. 


A fox looked at his shadow at sunrise and said, “I will have a camel for lunch 
today.” And all morning he went about looking for camels. But at noon he saw 
his shadow again—and he said, “A mouse will do.” 


The Wise King 


SSP ma. 


Once there ruled in the distant city of Wirani a king who was both mighty and 
wise. And he was feared for his might and loved for his wisdom. 

Now, in the heart of that city was a well, whose water was cool and crystalline, 
from which all the inhabitants drank, even the king and his courtiers; for there 
was no other well. 

One night when all were asleep, a witch entered the city, and poured seven 
drops of strange liquid into the well, and said, “From this hour he who drinks 
this water shall become mad.” 

Next morning all the inhabitants, save the king and his lord chamberlain, drank 
from the well and became mad, even as the witch had foretold. 

And during that day the people in the narrow streets and in the market places 
did naught but whisper to one another, “The king is mad. Our king and his lord 
chamberlain have lost their reason. Surely we cannot be ruled by a mad king. We 
must dethrone him.” 

That evening the king ordered a golden goblet to be filled from the well. And 
when it was brought to him he drank deeply, and gave it to his lord chamberlain 
to drink. 

And there was great rejoicing in that distant city of Wirani, because its king 
and its lord chamberlain had regained their reason. 


Ambition 
2, = = C) 


Three men met at a tavern table. One was a weaver, another a carpenter and the 
third a ploughman. 

Said the weaver, “I sold a fine linen shroud today for two pieces of gold. Let 
us have all the wine we want.” 

“And I,” said the carpenter, “I sold my best coffin. We will have a great roast 
with the wine.” 

“T only dug a grave,” said the ploughman, “but my patron paid me double. Let 
us have honey cakes too.” 

And all that evening the tavern was busy, for they called often for wine and 
meat and cakes. And they were merry. 

And the host rubbed his hands and smiled at his wife; for his guests were 
spending freely. 

When they left the moon was high, and they walked along the road singing 
and shouting together. 

The host and his wife stood in the tavern door and looked after them. 

“Ah!” said the wife, “these gentlemen! So freehanded and so gay! If only they 
could bring us such luck every day! Then our son need not be a tavern-keeper 
and work so hard. We could educate him, and he could become a priest.” 


The New Pleasure 
SesSsser—Se| 


Last night I invented a new pleasure, and as I was giving it the first trial an angel 
and a devil came rushing toward my house. They met at my door and fought 
with each other over my newly created pleasure; the one crying, “It is a sin!”— 
the other, “It is a virtue!” 


The Other Language 
QO os a C) 


Three days after I was born, as I lay in my silken cradle, gazing with astonished 
dismay on the new world round about me, my mother spoke to the wet-nurse, 
saying, “How does my child?” 

And the wet-nurse answered, “He does well, Madame, I have fed him three 
times; and never before have I seen a babe so young yet so gay.” 

And I was indignant; and I cried, “It is not true, mother; for my bed is hard, 
and the milk I have sucked is bitter to my mouth, and the odour of the breast is 
foul in my nostrils, and I am most miserable.” 

But my mother did not understand, nor did the nurse; for the language I spoke 
was that of the world from which I came. 

And on the twenty-first day of my life, as I was being christened, the priest 
said to my mother, “You should indeed by happy, Madame, that your son was 
bor a Christian.” 

And I was surprised,—and I said to the priest, “Then your mother in Heaven 
should be unhappy, for you were not born a Christian.” 

But the priest too did not understand my language. 

And after seven moons, one day a soothsayer looked at me, and he said to my 
mother, “Your son will be a statesman and a great leader of men.” 

But I cried out,—“That is a false prophet; for I shall be a musician, and naught 
but a musician shall I be.” 

But even at that age my language was not understood—and great was my 
astonishment. 

And after three and thirty years, during which my mother, and the nurse, and 
the priest have all died, (the shadow of God be upon their spirits) the soothsayer 
still lives. And yesterday I met him near the gates of the temple; and while we 
were talking together he said, “I have always known you would become a great 
musician. Even in your infancy I prophesied and foretold your future.” 


And I believed him—for now I too have forgotten the language of that other 
world. 


The Pomegranate 


») 


Once when I was living in the heart of a pomegranate, I heard a seed saying, 
“Someday I shall become a tree, and the wind will sing in my branches, and the 
sun will dance on my leaves, and I shall be strong and beautiful through all the 
seasons.” 

Then another seed spoke and said, “When I was as young as you, I too held 
such views; but now that I can weigh and measure things, I see that my hopes 
were vain.” 

And a third seed spoke also, “I see in us nothing that promises so great a 
future.” 

And a fourth said, “But what a mockery our life would be, without a greater 
future!” 

Said a fifth, “Why dispute what we shall be, when we know not even what we 
are.” 

But a sixth replied, “Whatever we are, that we shall continue to be.” 

And a seventh said, “I have such a clear idea how everything will be, but I 
cannot put it into words.” 

Then an eight spoke—and a ninth—and a tenth—and then many—until all 
were speaking, and I could distinguish nothing for the many voices. 

And so I moved that very day into the heart of a quince, where the seeds are 
few and almost silent. 


The Two Cages 
Sesser. 


In my father’s garden there are two cages. In one is a lion, which my father’s 
slaves brought from the desert of Ninavah; in the other is a songless sparrow. 

Every day at dawn the sparrow calls to the lion, “Good morrow to thee, 
brother prisoner.” 


The Three Ants 
'e, = ~<a C) 


Three ants met on the nose of a man who was asleep in the sun. And after they 
had saluted one another, each according to the custom of his tribe, they stood 
there conversing. 

The first ant said, “These hills and plains are the most barren I have known. I 
have searched all day for a grain of some sort, and there is none to be found.” 

Said the second ant, “I too have found nothing, though I have visited every 
nook and glade. This is, I believe, what my people call the soft, moving land 
where nothing grows.” 

Then the third ant raised his head and said, “My friends, we are standing now 
on the nose of the Supreme Ant, the mighty and infinite Ant, whose body is so 
great that we cannot see it, whose shadow is so vast that we cannot trace it, 
whose voice is so loud that we cannot hear it; and He is omnipresent.” 

When the third ant spoke thus the other ants looked at each other and laughed. 

At that moment the man moved and in his sleep raised his hand and scratched 
his nose, and the three ants were crushed. 


The Grave-Digger 
Sessar——S. 


Once, as I was burying one of my dead selves, the grave-digger came by and 
said to me, “Of all those who come here to bury, you alone I like.” 

Said I, “You please me exceedingly, but why do you like me?” 

“Because,” said he, “They come weeping and go weeping—you only come 
laughing and go laughing.” 


On the Steps of the Temple 
Sesare——> 2. 


Yestereve, on the marble steps of the Temple, I saw a woman sitting between 
two men. One side of her face was pale, the other was blushing. 


The Blessed City 
QO as a C) 


In my youth I was told that in a certain city every one lived according to the 
Scriptures. 

And I said, “I will seek that city and the blessedness thereof.” And it was far. 
And I made great provision for my journey. And after forty days I beheld the city 
and on the forty-first day I entered into it. 

And lo! The whole company of the inhabitants had each but a single eye and 
but one hand. And I was astonished and said to myself, “Shall they of this so 
holy city have but one eye and one hand?” 

Then I saw that they too were astonished, for they were marveling greatly at 
my two hands and my two eyes. And as they were speaking together I inquired 
of them saying, “Is this indeed the Blessed City, where each man lives according 
to the Scriptures?” And they said, “Yes, this is that city.” 

“And what,” said I, “hath befallen you, and where are your right eyes and your 
right hands?” 

And all the people were moved. And they said, “Come thou and see.” 

And they took me to the temple in the midst of the city. And in the temple I 
saw a heap of hands and eyes. All withered. Then said I, “Alas! What conqueror 
hath committed this cruelty upon you?” 

And there went a murmur amongst them. And one of their elders stood forth 
and said, “This doing is of ourselves. God hath made us conquerors over the evil 
that was in us.” 

And he led me to a high altar, and all the people followed. And he showed me 
above the altar an inscription graven, and I read: 

“If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that the whole 
body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and 
cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should 


perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.” 

Then I understood. And I turned about to all the people and cried, “Hath no 
man or woman among you two eyes or two hands?” 

And they answered me saying, “No, not one. There is none whole save such as 
are yet too young to read the Scripture and to understand its commandment.” 

And when we had come out of the temple, I straightway left that Blessed City; 
for I was not too young, and I could read the scripture. 


The Good God and the Evil God 
0 ee 


The Good God and the Evil God met on the mountain top. 

The Good God said, “Good day to you, brother.” 

The Evil God did not answer. 

And the Good God said, “You are in a bad humour today.” 

“Yes,” said the Evil God, “for of late I have been often mistaken for you, 
called by your name, and treated as if I were you, and it ill-pleases me.” 

And the Good God said, “But I too have been mistaken for you and called by 
your name.” 

The Evil God walked away cursing the stupidity of man. 


Defeat 
OO = = C) 


Defeat, my Defeat, my solitude and my aloofness; 
You are dearer to me than a thousand triumphs, 
And sweeter to my heart than all world-glory. 


Defeat, my Defeat, my self-knowledge and my defiance, 
Through you I know that I am yet young and swift of foot 
And not to be trapped by withering laurels. 

And in you I have found aloneness 

And the joy of being shunned and scorned. 


Defeat, my Defeat, my shining sword and shield, 
In your eyes I have read 

That to be enthroned is to be enslaved, 

And to be understood is to be leveled down, 
And to be grasped is but to reach one’s fullness 
And like a ripe fruit to fall and be consumed. 


Defeat, my Defeat, my bold companion, 

You shall hear my songs and my cries and my silences, 
And none but you shall speak to me of the beating of wings, 
And urging of seas, 

And of mountains that burn in the night, 

And you alone shall climb my steep and rocky soul. 


Defeat, my Defeat, my deathless courage, 


You and I shall laugh together with the storm, 

And together we shall dig graves for all that die in us, 
And we shall stand in the sun with a will, 

And we shall be dangerous. 


Night and the Madman 
(2 ~ a C) 


“T am like thee, O, Night, dark and naked; I walk on the flaming path which is 
above my day-dreams, and whenever my foot touches earth a giant oak tree 
comes forth.” 

“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still lookest backward to see 
how large a foot-print thou leavest on the sand.” 

“T am like thee, O, Night, silent and deep; and in the heart of my loneliness lies 
a Goddess in child-bed; and in him who is being born Heaven touches Hell.” 

“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou shudderest yet before pain, 
and the song of the abyss terrifies thee.” 

“T am like thee, O, Night, wild and terrible; for my ears are crowded with cries 
of conquered nations and sighs for forgotten lands.” 

“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still takest thy little-self for a 
comrade, and with thy monster-self thou canst not be friend.” 

“T am like thee, O, Night, cruel and awful; for my bosom is lit by burning 
ships at sea, and my lips are wet with blood of slain warriors.” 

“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman; for the desire for a sister-spirit is yet 
upon thee, and thou has not become alone unto thyself.” 

“T am like thee, O, Night, joyous and glad; for he who dwells in my shadow is 
now drunk with virgin wine, and she who follows me is sinning mirthfully.” 

“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thy soul is wrapped in the veil of 
seven folds and thou holdest not thy heart in thine hand.” 

“T am like thee, O, Night, patient and passionate; for in my breast a thousand 
dead lovers are buried in shrouds of withered kisses.” 

“Yea, Madman, art thou like me? Art thou like me? And canst thou ride the 
tempest as a steed, and grasp the lightning as a sword?” 

“Like thee, O, Night, like thee, mighty and high, and my throne is built upon 
heaps of fallen Gods; and before me too pass the days to kiss the hem of my 


garment but never to gaze at my face.” 

“Art thou like me, child of my darkest heart? And dost thou think my untamed 
thoughts and speak my vast language?” 

“Yea, we are twin brothers, O, Night; for thou revealest space and I reveal my 
soul.” 


Faces 


I have seen a face with a thousand countenances, and a face that was but a single 
countenance as if held in a mould. 

I have seen a face whose sheen I could look through to the ugliness beneath, 
and a face whose sheen I had to lift to see how beautiful it was. 

I have seen an old face much lined with nothing, and a smooth face in which 
all things were graven. 

I know faces, because I look through the fabric my own eye weaves, and 
behold the reality beneath. 


The Greater Sea 
E, — = C) 


My soul and I went to the great sea to bathe. And when we reached the shore, we 
went about looking for a hidden and lonely place. 

But as we walked, we saw a man sitting on a grey rock taking pinches of salt 
from a bag and throwing them into the sea. 

“This is the pessimist,” said my soul, “Let us leave this place. We cannot bathe 
here.” 

We walked on until we reached an inlet. There we saw, standing on a white 
rock, a man holding a bejeweled box, from which he took sugar and threw it into 
the sea. 

“And this is the optimist,” said my soul, “And he too must not see our naked 
bodies.” 

Further on we walked. And on a beach we saw a man picking up dead fish and 
tenderly putting them back into the water. 

“And we cannot bathe before him,” said my soul. “He is the humane 
philanthropist.” 

And we passed on. 

Then we came where we saw a man tracing his shadow on the sand. Great 
waves came and erased it. But he went on tracing it again and again. 

“He is the mystic,” said my soul, “Let us leave him.” 

And we walked on, till in a quiet cover we saw a man scooping up the foam 
and putting it into an alabaster bowl. 

“He is the idealist,” said my soul, “Surely he must not see our nudity.” 

And on we walked. Suddenly we heard a voice crying, “This is the sea. This is 
the deep sea. This is the vast and mighty sea.” And when we reached the voice it 
was a man whose back was turned to the sea, and at his ear he held a shell, 
listening to its murmur. 


And my soul said, “Let us pass on. He is the realist, who turns his back on the 
whole he cannot grasp, and busies himself with a fragment.” 


So we passed on. And in a weedy place among the rocks was a man with his 
head buried in the sand. And I said to my soul, “We can bath here, for he cannot 
see us.” 


“Nay,” said my soul, “For he is the most deadly of them all. He is the puritan.” 

Then a great sadness came over the face of my soul, and into her voice. 

“Let us go hence,” she said, “For there is no lonely, hidden place where we can 
bathe. I would not have this wind lift my golden hair, or bare my white bosom in 
this air, or let the light disclose my sacred nakedness.” 


Then we left that sea to seek the Greater Sea. 


Crucified 
OO — = C) 


I cried to men, “I would be crucified!” 

And they said, “Why should your blood be upon our heads?” 

And I answered, “How else shall you be exalted except by crucifying 
madmen?” 

And they heeded and I was crucified. And the crucifixion appeased me. 

And when I was hanged between earth and heaven they lifted up their heads to 
see me. And they were exalted, for their heads had never before been lifted. 

But as they stood looking up at me one called out, “For what art thou seeking 
to atone?” 

And another cried, “In what cause dost thou sacrifice thyself?” 

And a third said, “Thinkest thou with this price to buy world glory?” 

Then said a fourth, “Behold, how he smiles! Can such pain be forgiven?” 

And I answered them all, and said: 

“Remember only that I smiled. I do not atone—nor sacrifice—nor wish for 
glory; and I have nothing to forgive. I thirsted—and I besought you to give me 
my blood to drink. For what is there can quench a madman’s thirst but his own 
blood? I was dumb—and I asked wounds of you for mouths. I was imprisoned in 
your days and nights—and I sought a door into larger days and nights. 

And now I go—as others already crucified have gone. And think not we are 
weary of crucifixion. For we must be crucified by larger and yet larger men, 
between greater earths and greater heavens.” 


The Astronomer 


In the shadow of the temple my friend and I saw a blind man sitting alone. And 
my friend said, “Behold the wisest man of our land.” 

Then I left my friend and approached the blind man and greeted him. And we 
conversed. 

After a while I said, “Forgive my question; but since when has thou been 
blind?” 

“From my birth,” he answered. 

Said I, “And what path of wisdom followest thou?” 

Said he, “I am an astronomer.” 

Then he placed his hand upon his breast saying, “I watch all these suns and 
moons and stars.” 


The Great Longing 


Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea. 

We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together is deep and 
strong and strange. Nay, it is deeper than my sister’s depth and stronger than my 
brother’s strength, and stranger than the strangeness of my madness. 

Aeons upon aeons have passed since the first grey dawn made us visible to 
one another; and though we have seen the birth and the fullness and the death of 
many worlds, we are still eager and young. 

We are young and eager and yet we are mateless and unvisited, and though we 
lie in unbroken half embrace, we are uncomforted. And what comfort is there for 
controlled desire and unspent passion? Whence shall come the flaming god to 
warm my sister’s bed? And what she-torrent shall quench my brother’s fire? And 
who is the woman that shall command my heart? 

In the stillness of the night my sister murmurs in her sleep the fire-god’s 
unknown name, and my brother calls afar upon the cool and distant goddess. But 
upon whom I call in my sleep I know not. 

Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea. We three are 
one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together is deep and strong and 
strange. 


Said a Blade of Grass 


Said a blade of grass to an autumn leaf, “You make such a noise falling! You 
scatter all my winter dreams.” 

Said the leaf indignant, “Low-born and low-dwelling! Songless, peevish thing! 
You live not in the upper air and you cannot tell the sound of singing.” 

Then the autumn leaf lay down upon the earth and slept. And when spring 
came she waked again—and she was a blade of grass. 

And when it was autumn and her winter sleep was upon her, and above her 
through all the air the leaves were falling, she muttered to herself, “O these 
autumn leaves! They make such noise! They scatter all my winter dreams.” 


The Eye 


Said the Eye one day, “I see beyond these valleys a mountain veiled with blue 
mist. Is it not beautiful?” 

The Ear listened, and after listening intently awhile, said, “But where is any 
mountain? I do not hear it.” 

Then the Hand spoke and said, “I am trying in vain to feel it or touch it, and I 
can find no mountain.” 

And the Nose said, “There is no mountain, I cannot smell it.” 

Then the Eye turned the other way, and they all began to talk together about 
the Eye’s strange delusion. And they said, “Something must be the matter with 
the Eye.” 


The Two Learned Men 
Sesrr—ae2. 


Once there lived in the ancient city of Afkar two learned men who hated and 
belittled each other’s learning. For one of them denied the existence of the gods 
and the other was a believer. 

One day the two met in the marketplace, and amidst their followers they began 
to dispute and to argue about the existence or the non-existence of the gods. And 
after hours of contention they parted. 

That evening the unbeliever went to the temple and prostrated himself before 
the altar and prayed the gods to forgive his wayward past. 

And the same hour the other learned man, he who had upheld the gods, burned 
his sacred books. For he had become an unbeliever. 


When My Sorrow Was Born 


When my Sorrow was born I nursed it with care, and watched over it with loving 
tenderness. 

And my Sorrow grew like all living things, strong and beautiful and full of 
wondrous delights. 

And we loved one another, my Sorrow and I, and we loved the world about us; 
for Sorrow had a kindly heart and mine was kindly with Sorrow. 

And when we conversed, my Sorrow and I, our days were winged and our 
nights were girdled with dreams; for Sorrow had an eloquent tongue, and mine 
was eloquent with Sorrow. 

And when we sang together, my Sorrow and I, our neighbors sat at their 
windows and listened; for our songs were deep as the sea and our melodies were 
full of strange memories. 

And when we walked together, my Sorrow and I, people gazed at us with 
gentle eyes and whispered in words of exceeding sweetness. And there were 
those who looked with envy upon us, for Sorrow was a noble thing and I was 
proud with Sorrow. 

But my Sorrow died, like all living things, and alone I am left to muse and 
ponder. 

And now when I speak my words fall heavily upon my ears. 

And when I sing my songs my neighbours come not to listen. 

And when I walk the streets no one looks at me. 

Only in my sleep I hear voices saying in pity, “See, there lies the man whose 
Sorrow is dead.” 


And When My Joy was Born 


And when my Joy was born, I held it in my arms and stood on the house-top 
shouting, “Come ye, my neighbours, come and see, for Joy this day is born unto 
me. Come and behold this gladsome thing that laugheth in the sun.” 

But none of my neighbours came to look upon my Joy, and great was my 
astonishment. 

And every day for seven moons I proclaimed my Joy from the house-top—and 
yet no one heeded me. And my Joy and I were alone, unsought and unvisited. 

Then my Joy grew pale and weary because no other heart but mine held its 
loveliness and no other lips kissed its lips. 

Then my Joy died of isolation. 

And now I only remember my dead Joy in remembering my dead Sorrow. But 
memory is an autumn leaf that murmurs a while in the wind and then is heard no 
more. 


“The Perfect World” 


God of lost souls, thou who are lost amongst the gods, hear me: 

Gentle Destiny that watchest over us, mad, wandering spirits, hear me: 

I dwell in the midst of a perfect race, I the most imperfect. 

I, a human chaos, a nebula of confused elements, I move amongst finished 
worlds—peoples of complete laws and pure order, whose thoughts are assorted, 
whose dreams are arranged, and whose visions are enrolled and registered. 

Their virtues, O God, are measured, their sins are weighed, and even the 
countless things that pass in the dim twilight of neither sin nor virtue are 
recorded and catalogued. 

Here days and night are divided into seasons of conduct and governed by rules 
of blameless accuracy. 

To eat, to drink, to sleep, to cover one’s nudity, and then to be weary in due 
time. 

To work, to play, to sing, to dance, and then to lie still when the clock strikes 
the hour. 

To think thus, to feel thus much, and then to cease thinking and feeling when a 
certain star rises above yonder horizon. 

To rob a neighbour with a smile, to bestow gifts with a graceful wave of the 
hand, to praise prudently, to blame cautiously, to destroy a sound with a word, to 
burn a body with a breath, and then to wash the hands when the day’s work is 
done. 

To love according to an established order, to entertain one’s best self in a 
preconceived manner, to worship the gods becomingly, to intrigue the devils 
artfully—and then to forget all as though memory were dead. 

To fancy with a motive, to contemplate with consideration, to be happy 
sweetly, to suffer nobly—and then to empty the cup so that tomorrow may fill it 
again. 


All these things, O God, are conceived with forethought, born with 
determination, nursed with exactness, governed by rules, directed by reason, and 
then slain and buried after a prescribed method. And even their silent graves that 
lie within the human soul are marked and numbered. 

It is a perfect world, a world of consummate excellence, a world of supreme 
wonders, the ripest fruit in God’s garden, the master-thought of the universe. 

But why should I be here, O God, I a green seed of unfulfilled passion, a mad 
tempest that seeketh neither east nor west, a bewildered fragment from a burnt 
planet? 

Why am I here, O God of lost souls, thou who art lost amongst the gods? 


MY COUNTRYMEN 
(2 = = C) 


What do you seek, My Countrymen? 
Do you desire that I build for 

You Gorgeous palaces, decorated 
With words of empty meaning, or 
Temples roofed with dreams? Or 
Do you command me to destroy what 
The liars and tyrants have built? 
Shall I uproot with my fingers 

What the hypocrites and the wicked 
Have implanted? Speak your insane 
Wish! 

What is it you would have me do, 
My Countrymen? Shall I purr like 
The kitten to satisfy you, or roar 
Like the lion to please myself? I 
Have sung for you, but you did not 
Dance; I have wept before you, but 
You did not cry. Shall I sing and 
Weep at the same time? 


Your souls are suffering the pangs 
Of hunger, and yet the fruit of 
Knowledge is more plentiful than 
The stones of the valleys. 


Your hearts are withering from 
Thirst, and yet the springs of 
Life are streaming about your 
Homes—why do you not drink? 
The sea has its ebb and flow, 

The moon has its fullness and 
Crescents, and the Ages have 
Their winter and summer, and all 
Things vary like the shadow of 
An unborn God moving between 
Earth and sun, but Truth cannot 
Be changed, nor will it pass away; 
Why, then do you endeavor to 
Disfigure its countenance? 


I have called you in the silence 
Of the night to point out the 
Glory of the moon and the dignity 
Of the stars, but you startled 
From your slumber and clutched 
Your swords in fear, crying, 
“Where is the enemy? We must kill 
Him first!” At morning tide, when 
The enemy came, I called to you 
Again, but now you did not wake 
From your slumber, for you were 
Locked in fear, wresting with 

The procession of specters in 
Your dreams. 


And I said unto you, “Let us climb 
To the mountain top and view the 
Beauty of the world.” And you 


Answered me, saying, “In the depths 
Of this valley our fathers lived, 

And in its shadows they died, and in 
Its caves they were buried. How can 
We depart this place for one which 
They failed to honor?” 

And I said unto you, “Let us go to 
The plain that gives bounty to 

The sea.” And you spoke timidly to 
Me, saying, “The uproar of the abyss 
Will frighten our spirits, and the 
Terror of the depths will deaden 
Our bodies.” 


I have loved you, My Countrymen, but 
My love for you is painful to me 
Today I hate you, and hatred is a flood 
That sweeps away the dry branches 
And quavering houses. 

I have pitied your weakness, My 
Countrymen, but my pity has but 
Increases your feebleness, exalting 
And nourishing slothfulness which 

Is vain to Life. And today I see 

Your infirmity which my soul loathes 
And fears. 


I have cried over your humiliation 

And submission; and my tears streamed 
Like crystalline, but could not sear 
Away your stagnant weakness; yet they 
Removed the veil from my eyes. 


My tears have never reached your 
Petrified hearts, but they cleansed 
The darkness from my inner self. 
Today I am mocking at your suffering, 
For laughter is a raging thunder that 
Precedes the tempest and never comes 
After 

What do you desire, My Countrymen? 
Do you wish for me to show you 

The ghost of your countenance on 

The face of still water? Come, 
Now, and see how ugly you are! 


Look and meditate! Fear has 
Turned your hair gray as the 
Ashes, and dissipation has grown 
Over your eyes and made them into 
Obscured hollows, and cowardice 
Has touched your cheeks that now 
Appear as dismal pits in the 

Valley, and Death has kissed 

Your lips and left them yellow 

As the Autumn leaves. 


What is it that you seek, My 
Countrymen? What ask you from 
Life, who does not any longer 
Count you among her children? 


Your souls are freezing in the 
Clutches of the priests and 
Sorcerers, and your bodies 
Tremble between the paws of the 


Despots and the shedders of 
Blood, and your country quakes 
Under the marching feet of the 
Conquering enemy; what may you 
Expect even though you stand 
Proudly before the face of the 
Sun? Your swords are sheathed 
With rust, and your spears are 
Broken, and your shields are 
Laden with gaps; why, then, do 
You stand in the field of battle? 


Hypocrisy is your religion, and 
Falsehood is your life, and 
Nothingness is your ending; why, 
Then, are you living? Is not 
Death the sole comfort of the 
Miserables? 


Life is a resolution that 
Accompanies youth, and a diligence 
That follows maturity, and a 
Wisdom that pursues senility; but 
You, My Countrymen, were born old 
And weak. And your skins withered 
And your heads shrank, whereupon 
You became as children, running 
Into the mire and casting stones 
Upon each other. 


Knowledge is a light, enriching 
The warmth of life, and all may 
Partake who seek it out; but you, 


My Countrymen, seek out darkness 
And flee the light, awaiting the 
Coming of water from the rock, 
And your nation’s misery is your 
Crime... I do not forgive you 

Your sins, for you know what you 
Are doing. 


Humanity is a brilliant river 
Singing its way and carrying with 
Its mountains’ secrets into 

The heart of the sea; but you, 

My Countrymen, are stagnant 
Marshes infested with insects 
And Vipers. 


The Spirit is a sacred blue 

Torch, burning and devouring 
The dry plants, and growing 

With the storm and illuminating 
The faces of the goddesses; but 
You, My Countrymen...your souls 
Are like ashes which the winds 
Scatter upon the snow, and which 
The tempests disperse forever in 
The valleys. 


Fear not the phantom of Death, 
My Countrymen, for his greatness 
And mercy will refuse to approach 
Your smallness; and dread not the 
Dagger, for it will decline to be 
Lodged in your shallow hearts. 


I hate you, My Countrymen, because 
You hate glory and greatness. I 
Despise you because you despise 
Yourselves. I am your enemy, for 
You refuse to realize that you are 
The enemies of the goddesses. 


THE NEW FRONTIER 
(2 = = C) 


There are in the Middle East today two challenging ideas: old and new. 

The old ideas will vanish because they are weak and exhausted. 

There is in the Middle East an awakening that defies slumber. This awakening 
will conquer because the sun is its leader and the dawn is its army. 

In the fields of the Middle East, which have been a large burial ground, stand 
the youth of Spring calling the occupants of the sepulchers to rise and march 
toward the new frontiers. 

When the Spring sings its hymns the dead of the winter rise, shed their shrouds 
and march forward. 

There is on the horizon of the Middle East a new awakening; it is growing and 
expanding; it is reaching and engulfing all sensitive, intelligent souls; it is 
penetrating and gaining all the sympathy of noble hearts. 

The Middle East, today, has two masters. One is deciding, ordering, being 
obeyed; but he is at the point of death. 

But the other one is silent in his conformity to law and order, calmly awaiting 
justice; he is a powerful giant who knows his own strength, confident in his 
existence and a believer in his destiny. 

There are today, in the Middle East, two men: one of the past and one of the 
future. Which one are you? Come close, let me look at you and let me be assured 
by your appearance and your conduct if you are one of those coming into the 
light or going into the darkness. 

Come and tell me who and what are you. 

Are you a politician asking what your country can do for you or a zealous one 
asking what you can do for your country? 

If you are the first, then you are a parasite; if the second, then you are an oasis 
in a desert. 

Are you a merchant utilizing the need of society for the necessities of life, for 


monopoly and exorbitant profit? Or a sincere, hard-working and diligent man 
facilitating the exchange between the weaver and the farmer? Are you charging a 
reasonable profit as a middleman between supply and demand? 

If you are the first, then you are a criminal whether you live in a palace or a 
prison. If you are the second, then you are a charitable man whether you are 
thanked or denounced by people. 

Are you a religious leader, weaving for your body a gown out of the ignorance 
of the people, fashioning a crown out of the simplicity of their hearts and 
pretending to hate the devil merely to live upon his income? 

Or are you a devout and a pious man who sees in the piety of the individual the 
foundation for a progressive nation, and who can see through a profound search 
in the depth of his own soul a ladder to the eternal soul that directs the world? 

If you are the first, then you are a heretic, a disbeliever in God even if you fast 
by day and pray by night. 

If you are the second, then you are a violet in the garden of truth even though 
its fragrance is lost upon the nostrils of humanity or whether its aroma rises into 
that rare air where the fragrance of flowers is preserved. 

Are you a newspaperman who sells his idea and principle in the slave market, 
who lives on the misery of people like a buzzard which descends only upon a 
decaying carcass? 

Or are you a teacher on the platform of the city gathering experience from life 
and presenting it to the people as sermons you have learned? 

If you are the first, then you are a sore and an ulcer. If you are the second, then 
you are a balsam and a medicine. 

Are you a governor who denigrates himself before those who appoint him and 
denigrates those whom he is to govern, who never raises a hand unless it is to 
reach into pockets and who does not take a step unless it is for greed? 

Or are you a faithful servant who serves only the welfare of the people? 

If you are the first, then you are as a tare in the threshing floor of the nations; 
and if the second, then you are a blessing upon its granaries. 

Are you a husband who allows for himself what he disallows for his wife, 
living in abandonment with the key of her prison in his boots, gorging himself 
with his favorite food while she sits, by herself, before an empty dish? 

Or are you a companion, taking no action except hand in hand, nor doing 
anything unless she gives her thoughts and opinions, and sharing with her your 
happiness and success? 


If you are the first, then you are a remnant of a tribe which, still dressing in the 
skins of animals, vanished long before leaving the caves; and if you are the 
second, then you are a leader in a nation moving in the dawn toward the light of 
justice and wisdom. 

Are you a searching writer full of self-admiration, keeping his head in the 
valley of a dusty past, where the ages discarded the remnant of its clothes and 
useless ideas? 

Or are you a clear thinker examining what is good and useful for society and 
spending your life in building what is useful and destroying what is harmful? 

If you are the first, then you are feeble and stupid, and if you are the second, 
then you are bread for the hungry and water for the thirsty. 

Are you a poet, who plays the tambourine at the doors of emirs, or the one 
who throws the flowers during weddings and who walks in processions with a 
sponge full of warm water in his mouth, a sponge to be pressed by his tongue 
and lips as soon as he reaches the cemetery? 

Or have you a gift which God has placed in your hands on which to play 
heavenly melodies which draw our hearts toward the beautiful in life? 

If you are the first, then you are a juggler who evokes in our soul that which is 
contrary to what you intend. 

If you are the second, then you are love in our hearts and a vision in our 
minds. 

In the Middle East there are two processions: One procession is of old people 
waling with bent backs, supported with bent canes; they are out of breath though 
their path is downhill. 

The other is a procession of young men, running as if on winged feet, and 
jubilant as with musical strings in their throats, surmounting obstacles as if there 
were magnets drawing them up on the mountainside and magic enchanting their 
hearts. 

Which are you and in which procession do you move? 

Ask yourself and meditate in the still of the night; find if you are a slave of 
yesterday or free for the morrow. 

I tell you that the children of yesteryears are walking in the funeral of the era 
that they created for themselves. They are pulling a rotted rope that might break 
soon and cause them to drop into a forgotten abyss. I say that they are living in 
homes with weak foundations; as the storm blows—and it is about to blow— 
their homes will fall upon their heads and thus become their tombs. I say that all 


their thoughts, their sayings, their quarrels, their compositions, their books and 
all their work are nothing but chains dragging them because they are too weak to 
pull the load. 

But the children of tomorrow are the ones called by life, and the follow it with 
steady steps and heads high, they are the dawn of new frontiers, no smoke will 
veil their eyes and no jingle of chains will drown out their voices. They are few 
in number, but the difference is as between a grain of wheat and a stack of hay. 
No one knows them but they know each other. They are like the summits, which 
can see or hear each other—not like caves, which cannot hear or see. They are 
the seed dropped by the hand of God in the field, breaking through its pod and 
waving its sapling leaves before the face of the sun. It shall grow into a mighty 
tree, its root in the heart of the earth and its branches high in the sky. 


THE PROPHET 


The twelve illustrations in this volume are reproduced from 
original drawings by the author 


‘His power came from some great reservoir of spiritual life else it could not have 
been so universal and so potent, but the majesty and beauty of the language with 
which he clothed it were all his own.’ 

—Claude Bragdon 


The Coming of the Ship 


2 


| — 


Almustafa, the chosen and the beloved, who was a dawn unto his own day, had 
waited twelve years in the city of Orphalese for his ship that was to return and 
bear him back to the isle of his birth. 

And in the twelfth year, on the seventh day of Ielool, the month of reaping, he 
climbed the hill without the city walls and looked seaward; and he beheld his 
ship coming with the mist. 

Then the gates of his heart were flung open, and his joy flew far over the sea. 
And he closed his eyes and prayed in the silences of his soul. 

But as he descended the hill, a sadness came upon him, and he thought in his 
heart: 

How shall I go in peace and without sorrow? Nay, not without a wound in the 
spirit shall I leave this city. 

Long were the days of pain I have spent within its walls, and long were the 
nights of aloneness; and who can depart from his pain and his aloneness without 
regret? 

Too many fragments of the spirit have I scattered in these streets, and too 
many are the children of my longing that walk naked among these hills, and I 
cannot withdraw from them without a burden and an ache. 

It is not a garment I cast off this day, but a skin that I tear with my own hands. 

Nor is it a thought I leave behind me, but a heart made sweet with hunger and 
with thirst. 

Yet I cannot tarry longer. 

The sea that calls all things unto her calls me, and I must embark. 

For to stay, though the hours burn in the night, is to freeze and crystallize and 
be bound in a mould. 

Fain would I take with me all that is here. But how shall I? 


A voice cannot carry the tongue and the lips that gave it wings. Alone must it 
seek the ether. 

And alone and without his nest shall the eagle fly across the sun. 

Now when he reached the foot of the hill, he turned again towards the sea, and 
he saw his ship approaching the harbour, and upon her prow the mariners, the 
men of his own land. 

And his soul cried out to them, and he said: 

Sons of my ancient mother, you riders of the tides, 

How often have you sailed in my dreams. And now you come in my 
awakening, which is my deeper dream. 

Ready am I to go, and my eagerness with sails full set awaits the wind. 

Only another breath will I breathe in this still air, only another loving look cast 
backward, 

And then I shall stand among you, a seafarer among seafarers. 

And you, vast sea, sleeping mother, 

Who alone are peace and freedom to the river and the stream, 

Only another winding will this stream make, only another murmur in this 
glade, 

And then I shall come to you, a boundless drop to a boundless ocean. 

And as he walked he saw from afar men and women leaving their fields and 
their vineyards and hastening towards the city gates. 

And he heard their voices calling his name, and shouting from field to field 
telling one another of the coming of his ship. 

And he said to himself: 

Shall the day of parting be the day of gathering? 

And shall it be said that my eve was in truth my dawn? 

And what shall I give unto him who has left his plough in midfurrow, or to 
him who has stopped the wheel of his winepress? 

Shall my heart become a tree heavy-laden with fruit that I may gather and give 
unto them? 

And shall my desires flow like a fountain that I may fill their cups? 

Am I a harp that the hand of the mighty may touch me, or a flute that his 
breath may pass through me? 

A seeker of silences am I, and what treasure have I found in silences that I may 


dispense with confidence? 

If this is my day of harvest, in what fields have I sowed the seed, and in what 
unremembered seasons? 

If this indeed be the hour in which I lift up my lantern, it is not my flame that 
shall burn therein. 

Empty and dark shall I raise my lantern, 

And the guardian of the night shall fill it with oil and he shall light it also. 

These things he said in words. But much in his heart remained unsaid. For he 
himself could not speak his deeper secret. 

And when he entered into the city all the people came to meet him, and they 
were crying out to him as with one voice. 

And the elders of the city stood forth and said: 

Go not yet away from us. 

A noontide have you been in our twilight, and your youth has given us dreams 
to dream. 

No stranger are you among us, nor a guest, but our son and our dearly beloved. 

Suffer not yet our eyes to hunger for your face. 

And the priests and the priestess said unto him: 

Let not the waves of the sea separate us now, and the years you have spent in 
our midst become a memory. 


You have walked among us a spirit, and your shadow has been a light upon 
our faces. 


Much have we loved you. But speechless was our love, and with veils has it 
been veiled. 

Yet now it cries aloud unto you, and would stand revealed before you. 

And ever has it been that love knows not its own depth until the hour of 
separation. 

And others came also and entreated him. But he answered them not. He only 
bent his head; and those who stood near saw his tears falling upon his breast. 

And he and the people proceeded towards the great square before the temple. 


And there came out of the sanctuary a woman whose name was Almitra. And 
she was a seeress. 


And he looked upon her with exceeding tenderness, for it was she who had 
first sought and believed in him when he had been but a day in their city. 

And she hailed him, saying: 

Prophet of God, in quest for the uttermost, long have you searched the 
distances for your ship. 

And now your ship has come, and you must needs go. 

Deep is your longing for the land of your memories and the dwelling-place of 
your greater desires; and our love would not bind you nor our needs hold you. 

Yet this we ask ere you leave us, that you speak to us and give us of your truth. 

And we will give it unto our children, and they unto their children, and it shall 
not perish. 

In your aloneness you have watched with our days, and in your wakefulness 
you have listened to the weeping and the laughter of our sleep. 


Now, therefore, disclose us to ourselves, and tell us all that has been shown 
you of that which is between birth and death. 


And he answered: 


People of Orphalese, of what can I speak save of that which is even now 
moving within your souls? 


Love 


Then said Almitra, “Speak to us of Love.” 

And he raised his head and looked upon the people, and there fell a stillness 
upon them. And with a great voice he said: 

When love beckons to you, follow him, 

Though his ways are hard and steep. 

And when his wings enfold you yield to him, 

Though the sword hidden among his pinions may wound you. 

And when he speaks to you believe in him, 

Though his voice may shatter your dreams as the north wind lays waste the 
garden. 

For even as love crowns you so shall he crucify you. Even as he is for your 
growth so is he for your pruning. 

Even as he ascends to your height and caresses your tenderest branches that 
quiver in the sun, 

So shall he descend to your roots and shake them in their clinging to the earth. 

Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto himself. 

He threshes you to make you naked. 

He sifts you to free you from your husks. 

He grinds you to whiteness. 

He kneads you until you are pliant; 

And then he assigns you to his sacred fire, that you may become sacred bread 
for God’s sacred feast. 


All these things shall love do unto you that you may know the secrets of your 
heart, and in that knowledge become a fragment of Life’s heart. 


But if in your fear you would seek only love’s peace and love’s pleasure. 
Then it is better for you that you cover your nakedness and pass out of love’s 


threshing-floor, 

Into the seasonless world where you shall laugh, but not all of your laughter, 
and weep, but not all of your tears. 

Love gives naught but itself and takes naught but from itself. 

Love possesses not nor would it be possessed; 

For love is sufficient unto love. 

When you love you should not say, “God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am in 
the heart of God.” 

And think not you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you 
worthy, directs your course. 

Love has no other desire but to fulfil itself. 


But if you love and must needs have desires, let these be your desires: 

To melt and be like a running brook that sings its melody to the night. 

To know the pain of too much tenderness. 

To be wounded by your own understanding of love; 

And to bleed willingly and joyfully. 

To wake at dawn with a winged heart and give thanks for another day of 
loving; 

To rest at the noon hour and meditate love’s ecstasy; 

To return home at eventide with gratitude; 

And then to sleep with a prayer for the beloved in your heart and a song of 
praise upon your lips. 


Marriage 


Then Almitra spoke again and said, “And what of Marriage, master?” 
And he answered saying: 
You were born together, and together you shall be for evermore. 
You shall be together when the white wings of death scatter your days. 
Aye, you shall be together even in the silent memory of God. 
But let there be spaces in your togetherness, 
And let the winds of the heavens dance between you. 
Love one another, but make not a bond of love: 
Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls. 


Fill each other’s cup but drink not from one cup. 

Give one another of your bread but eat not from the same loaf. 

Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone, 

Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music. 
Give your hearts, but not into each other’s keeping. 

For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts. 

And stand together yet not too near together: 

For the pillars of the temple stand apart, 

And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other’s shadow. 


Children 


And a woman who held a babe against her bosom said, “Speak to us of 
Children.” 


And he said: 

Your children are not your children. 

They are the sons and daughters of Life’s longing for itself. 
They come through you but not from you, 

And though they are with you, yet they belong not to you. 
You may give them your love but not your thoughts, 

For they have their own thoughts. 

You may house their bodies but not their souls, 


For their souls dwell in the house of tomorrow, which you cannot visit, not 
even in your dreams. 


You may strive to be like them, but seek not to make them like you. 
For life goes not backward nor tarries with yesterday. 
You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth. 


The Archer sees the mark upon the path of the infinite, and He bends you with 
His might that His arrows may go swift and far. 


Let your bending in the Archer’s hand be for gladness; 
For even as He loves the arrow that flies, so He loves also the bow that is 
stable. 


Giving 


Then said a rich man, “Speak to us of Giving.” 

And he answered: 

You give but little when you give of your possessions. 

It is when you give of yourself that you truly give. 

For what are your possessions but things you keep and guard for fear you may 
need them tomorrow? 


And tomorrow, what shall tomorrow bring to the over-prudent dog burying 
bones in the trackless sand as he follows the pilgrims to the holy city? 


And what is fear of need but need itself? 
Is not dread of thirst when your well is full, the thirst that is unquenchable? 


There are those who give little of the much which they have — and they give it 
for recognition and their hidden desire makes their gifts unwholesome. 

And there are those who have little and give it all. 

These are the believers in life and the bounty of life, and their coffer is never 
empty. 

There are those who give with joy, and that joy is their reward. 

And there are those who give with pain, and that pain is their baptism. 

And there are those who give and know not pain in giving, nor do they seek 
joy, nor give with mindfulness of virtue; 

They give as in yonder valley the myrtle breathes its fragrance into space. 


Through the hands of such as these God speaks, and from behind their eyes He 
smiles upon the earth. 

It is well to give when asked, but it is better to give unasked, through 
understanding; 

And to the open-handed the search for one who shall receive is joy greater 
than giving. 

And is there aught you would withhold? 

All you have shall some day be given; 

Therefore give now, that the season of giving may be yours and not your 
inheritors’. 

You often say, “I would give, but only to the deserving.” 

The trees in your orchard say not so, nor the flocks in your pasture. 

They give that they may live, for to withhold is to perish. 

Surely he who is worthy to receive his days and his nights is worthy of all else 
from you. 

And he who has deserved to drink from the ocean of life deserves to fill his 
cup from your little stream. 


And what desert greater shall there be, than that which lies in the courage and 
the confidence, nay the charity, of receiving? 


And who are you that men should rend their bosom and unveil their pride, that 
you may see their worth naked and their pride unabashed? 


See first that you yourself deserve to be a giver, and an instrument of giving. 
For in truth it is life that gives unto life - while you, who deem yourself a 


giver, are but a witness. 


And you receivers — and you are all receivers — assume no weight of gratitude, 
lest you lay a yoke upon yourself and upon him who gives. 


Rather rise together with the giver on his gifts as on wings; 


For to be overmindful of your debt, is to doubt his generosity who has the 
free-hearted earth for mother, and God for father. 


Eating and Drinking 


| — 


Then an old man, a keeper of an inn, said, “Speak to us of Eating and Drinking.” 

And he said: 

Would that you could live on the fragrance of the earth, and like an air plant be 
sustained by the light. 

But since you must kill to eat, and rob the newly born of its mother’s milk to 
quench your thirst, let it then be an act of worship. 

And let your board stand an altar on which the pure and the innocent of forest 
and plain are sacrificed for that which is purer and still more innocent in man. 

When you kill a beast say to him in your heart: 

“By the same power that slays you, I too am slain; and I too shall be 
consumed. 

For the law that delivered you into my hand shall deliver me into a mightier 
hand. 

Your blood and my blood is naught but the sap that feeds the tree of heaven.” 

And when you crush an apple with your teeth, say to it in your heart: 

“Your seeds shall live in my body, 

And the buds of your tomorrow shall blossom in my heart, 

And your fragrance shall be my breath, 

And together we shall rejoice through all the seasons.” 

And in the autumn, when you gather the grapes of your vineyard for the 
winepress, say in your heart: 

“T too am a vineyard, and my fruit shall be gathered for the winepress, 

And like new wine I shall be kept in eternal vessels.” 

And in winter, when you draw the wine, let there be in your heart a song for 
each cup; 

And let there be in the song a remembrance for the autumn days, and for the 


vineyard, and for the winepress. 


Work 


Then a ploughman said, “Speak to us of Work.” 
And he answered, saying: 
You work that you may keep pace with the earth and the soul of the earth. 


For to be idle is to become a stranger unto the seasons, and to step out of life’s 
procession, that marches in majesty and proud submission towards the infinite. 


When you work you are a flute through whose heart the whispering of the 
hours turns to music. 

Which of you would be a reed, dumb and silent, when all else sings together in 
unison? 

Always you have been told that work is a curse and labour a misfortune. 


But I say to you that when you work you fulfil a part of earth’s furthest dream, 
assigned to you when that dream was born, 

And in keeping yourself with labour you are in truth loving life, 

And to love life through labour is to be intimate with life’s inmost secret. 

But if you in your pain call birth an affliction and the support of the flesh a 
curse written upon your brow, then I answer that naught but the sweat of your 
brow shall wash away that which is written. 


You have been told also that life is darkness, and in your weariness you echo 
what was said by the weary. 


And I say that life is indeed darkness save when there is urge, 
And all urge is blind save when there is knowledge, 

And all knowledge is vain save when there is work, 

And all work is empty save when there is love; 


And when you work with love you bind yourself to yourself, and to one 
another, and to God. 


And what is it to work with love? 


It is to weave the cloth with threads drawn from your heart, even as if your 
beloved were to wear that cloth. 

It is to build a house with affection, even as if your beloved were to dwell in 
that house. 

It is to sow seeds with tenderness and reap the harvest with joy, even as if your 
beloved were to eat the fruit. 

It is to charge all things you fashion with a breath of your own spirit, 

And to know that all the blessed dead are standing about you and watching. 

Often have I heard you say, as if speaking in sleep, “He who works in marble, 
and finds the shape of his own soul in the stone, is nobler than he who ploughs 
the soil. 

And he who seizes the rainbow to lay it on a cloth in the likeness of man, is 
more than he who makes the sandals for our feet.” 

But I say, not in sleep, but in the over wakefulness of noontide, that the wind 
speaks not more sweetly to the giant oaks than to the least of all the blades of 
grass; 

And he alone is great who turns the voice of the wind into a song made 
sweeter by his own loving. 

Work is love made visible. 

And if you cannot work with love but only with distaste, it is better than you 
should leave your work and sit at the gate of the temple and take alms of those 
who work with joy. 

For if you bake bread with indifference, you bake a bitter bread that feeds but 
half man’s hunger. 

And if you grudge the crushing of the grapes, your grudge distils a poison in 
the wine. 

And if you sing though as angels, and love not the singing, you muffle man’s 
ears to the voices of the day and the voices of the night. 


Joy and Sorrow 


2 


Then a woman said, “Speak to us of Joy and Sorrow.” 

And he answered: 

Your joy is your sorrow unmasked. 

And the selfsame well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled 
with your tears. 

And how else can it be? 

The deeper that sorrow carves into your being, the more joy you can contain. 

Is not the cup that holds your wine the very cup that was burned in the potter’s 
oven? 

And is not the lute that soothes your spirit, the very wood that was hollowed 
with knives? 

When you are joyous, look deep into your heart and you shall find it is only 
that which has given you sorrow that is giving you joy. 

When you are sorrowful look again in your heart, and you shall see that in 
truth you are weeping for that which has been your delight. 

Some of you say, “Joy is greater than sorrow,” and others say, “Nay, sorrow is 
the greater.” 

But I say unto you, they are inseparable. 

Together they come, and when one sits alone with you at your board, 
remember that the other is asleep upon your bed. 

Verily you are suspended like scales between your sorrow and your joy. 

Only when you are empty are you at standstill and balanced. 


When the treasure-keeper lifts you to weigh his gold and his silver, needs must 
your joy or your sorrow rise or fall. 


Houses 
© — ~ C) 


Then a mason came forth and said, “Speak to us of Houses.” 

And he answered and said: 

Build of your imaginings a bower in the wilderness ere you build a house 
within the city walls. 

For even as you have home-comings in your twilight, so has the wanderer in 
you, the ever distant and alone. 

Your house is your larger body. 

It grows in the sun and sleeps in the stillness of the night; and it is not 
dreamless. Does not your house dream, and dreaming, leave the city for grove or 
hilltop? 

Would that I could gather your houses into my hand, and like a sower scatter 
them in forest and meadow. 

Would the valleys were your streets, and the green paths your alleys, that you 
might seek one another through vineyards, and come with the fragrance of the 
earth in your garments. 

But these things are not yet to be. 

In their fear your forefathers gathered you too near together. And that fear 
shall endure a little longer. A little longer shall your city walls separate your 
hearths from your fields. 

And tell me, people of Orphalese, what have you in these houses? And what is 
it you guard with fastened doors? 

Have you peace, the quiet urge that reveals your power? 

Have you remembrances, the glimmering arches that span the summits of the 
mind? 

Have you beauty, that leads the heart from things fashioned of wood and stone 
to the holy mountain? 


Tell me, have you these in your houses? 

Or have you only comfort, and the lust for comfort, that stealthy thing that 
enters the house a guest, and then becomes a host, and then a master? 

Ay, and it becomes a tamer, and with hook and scourge makes puppets of your 
larger desires. 

Though its hands are silken, its heart is of iron. 

It lulls you to sleep only to stand by your bed and jeer at the dignity of the 
flesh. 

It makes mock of your sound senses, and lays them in thistledown like fragile 
vessels. 

Verily the lust for comfort murders the passion of the soul, and then walks 
grinning in the funeral. 

But you, children of space, you restless in rest, you shall not be trapped nor 
tamed. 

Your house shall be not an anchor but a mast. 

It shall not be a glistening film that covers a wound, but an eyelid that guards 
the eye. 

You shall not fold your wings that you may pass through doors, nor bend your 
heads that they strike not against a ceiling, nor fear to breathe lest walls should 
crack and fall down. 

You shall not dwell in tombs made by the dead for the living. 

And though of magnificence and splendour, your house shall not hold your 
secret nor shelter your longing. 

For that which is boundless in you abides in the mansion of the sky, whose 
door is the morming mist, and whose windows are the songs and the silences of 
night. 


Clothes 
O = a C) 


And the weaver said, “Speak to us of Clothes.” 

And he answered: 

Your clothes conceal much of your beauty, yet they hide not the unbeautiful. 

And though you seek in garments the freedom of privacy you may find in 
them a harness and a chain. 

Would that you could meet the sun and the wind with more of your skin and 
less of your raiment, 

For the breath of life is in the sunlight and the hand of life is in the wind. 

Some of you say, “It is the north wind who has woven the clothes we wear.” 

And I say, Ay, it was the north wind. 

But shame was his loom, and the softening of the sinews was his thread. 

And when his work was done he laughed in the forest. 

Forget not that modesty is for a shield against the eye of the unclean. 

And when the unclean shall be no more, what were modesty but a fetter and a 
fouling of the mind? 

And forget not that the earth delights to feel your bare feet and the winds long 
to play with your hair. 


Buying and Selling 
(2 = = C) 


And a merchant said, “Speak to us of Buying and Selling.” 
And he answered and said: 


To you the earth yields her fruit, and you shall not want if you but know how 
to fill your hands. 

It is in exchanging the gifts of the earth that you shall find abundance and be 
satisfied. 


Yet unless the exchange be in love and kindly justice, it will but lead some to 
greed and others to hunger. 


When in the market-place you toilers of the sea and fields and vineyards meet 
the weavers and the potters and the gatherers of spices — 


Invoke then the master spirit of the earth, to come into your midst and sanctify 
the scales and the reckoning that weighs value against value. 


And suffer not the barren-handed to take part in your transactions, who would 
sell their words for your labour. 

To such men you should say: 

“Come with us to the field, or go with our brothers to the sea and cast your net; 

For the land and the sea shall be bountiful to you even as to us.” 

And if there come the singers and the dancers and the flute-players, — buy of 
their gifts also. 

For they too are gatherers of fruit and frankincense, and that which they bring, 
though fashioned of dreams, is raiment and food for your soul. 

And before you leave the market-place, see that no one has gone his way with 
empty hands. 

For the master spirit of the earth shall not sleep peacefully upon the wind till 
the needs of the least of you are satisfied. 


Crime and Punishment 


») 


Then one of the judges of the city stood forth and said, “Speak to us of Crime 
and Punishment.” 

And he answered, saying: 

It is when your spirit goes wandering upon the wind, 

That you, alone and unguarded, commit a wrong unto others and therefore 
unto yourself. 

And for that wrong committed must you knock and wait a while unheeded at 
the gate of the blessed. 

Like the ocean is your god-self; 

It remains for ever undefiled. 

And like the ether it lifts but the winged. 

Even like the sun is your god-self; 

It knows not the ways of the mole nor seeks it the holes of the serpent. 

But your god-self dwells not alone in your being. 

Much in you is still man, and much in you is not yet man, 

But a shapeless pigmy that walks asleep in the mist searching for its own 
awakening. 

And of the man in you would I now speak. 

For it is he and not your god-self nor the pigmy in the mist, that knows crime 
and the punishment of crime. 

Oftentimes have I heard you speak of one who commits a wrong as though he 
were not one of you, but a stranger unto you and an intruder upon your world. 

But I say that even as the holy and the righteous cannot rise beyond the highest 
which is in each one of you, 

So the wicked and the weak cannot fall lower than the lowest which is in you 
also. 


And as a single leaf turns not yellow but with the silent knowledge of the 
whole tree, 


So the wrongdoer cannot do wrong without the hidden will of you all. 
Like a procession you walk together towards your god-self. 
You are the way and the wayfarers. 


And when one of you falls down he falls for those behind him, a caution 
against the stumbling stone. 


Ay, and he falls for those ahead of him, who though faster and surer of foot, 
yet removed not the stumbling stone. 


And this also, though the word lie heavy upon your hearts: 
The murdered is not unaccountable for his own murder, 
And the robbed is not blameless in being robbed. 

The righteous is not innocent of the deeds of the wicked, 
And the white-handed is not clean in the doings of the felon. 
Yea, the guilty is oftentimes the victim of the injured, 


And still more often the condemned is the burden bearer for the guiltless and 
unblamed. 


You cannot separate the just from the unjust and the good from the wicked; 


For they stand together before the face of the sun even as the black thread and 
the white are woven together. 


And when the black thread breaks, the weaver shall look into the whole cloth, 
and he shall examine the loom also. 


If any of you would bring to judgement the unfaithful wife, 


Let him also weigh the heart of her husband in scales, and measure his soul 
with measurements. 

And let him who would lash the offender look unto the spirit of the offended. 

And if any of you would punish in the name of righteousness and lay the axe 
unto the evil tree, let him see to its roots; 

And verily he will find the roots of the good and the bad, the fruitful and the 
fruitless, all entwined together in the silent heart of the earth. 

And you judges who would be just. 

What judgement pronounce you upon him who though honest in the flesh yet 
is a thief in spirit? 

What penalty lay you upon him who slays in the flesh yet is himself slain in 


the spirit? 

And how prosecute you him who in action is a deceiver and an oppressor, 

Yet who also is aggrieved and outraged? 

And how shall you punish those whose remorse is already greater than their 
misdeeds? 

Is not remorse the justice which is administered by that very law which you 
would fain serve? 

Yet you cannot lay remorse upon the innocent nor lift it from the heart of the 
guilty. 

Unbidden shall it call in the night, that men may wake and gaze upon 
themselves. 

And you who would understand justice, how shall you unless you look upon 
all deeds in the fullness of light? 

Only then shall you know that the erect and the fallen are but one man 
standing in twilight between the night of his pigmy-self and the day of his god- 
self, 

And that the cornerstone of the temple is not higher than the lowest stone in its 
foundation. 


Laws 


Then a lawyer said, “But what of our Laws, master?” 

And he answered: 

You delight in laying down laws, 

Yet you delight more in breaking them. 

Like children playing by the ocean who build sand-towers with constancy and 
then destroy them with laughter. 

But while you build your sand-towers the ocean brings more sand to the shore, 
And when you destroy them, the ocean laughs with you. 

Verily the ocean laughs always with the innocent. 


But what of those to whom life is not an ocean, and man-made laws are not 
sand-towers, 

But to whom life is a rock, and the law a chisel with which they would carve it 
in their own likeness? 

What of the cripple who hates dancers? 

What of the ox who loves his yoke and deems the elk and deer of the forest 
stray and vagrant things? 


What of the old serpent who cannot shed his skin, and calls all others naked 
and shameless? 

And of him who comes early to the wedding-feast, and when overfed and tired 
goes his way saying that all feasts are violation and all feasters lawbreakers? 


What shall I say of these save that they too stand in the sunlight, but with their 
backs to the sun? 


They see only their shadows, and their shadows are their laws. 
And what is the sun to them but a caster of shadows? 


And what is it to acknowledge the laws but to stoop down and trace their 
shadows upon the earth? 


But you who walk facing the sun, what images drawn on the earth can hold 
you? 

You who travel with the wind, what weather-vane shall direct your course? 

What man’s law shall bind you if you break your yoke but upon no man’s 
prison door? 

What laws shall you fear if you dance but stumble against no man’s iron 
chains? 

And who is he that shall bring you to judgment if you tear off your garment 
yet leave it in no man’s path? 

People of Orphalese, you can muffle the drum, and you can loosen the strings 
of the lyre, but who shall command the skylark not to sing? 


Freedom 
OO a = C) 


And an orator said, “Speak to us of Freedom.” 

And he answered: 

At the city gate and by your fireside I have seen you prostrate yourself and 
worship your own freedom, 

Even as slaves humble themselves before a tyrant and praise him though he 
slays them. 

Ay, in the grove of the temple and in the shadow of the citadel I have seen the 
freest among you wear their freedom as a yoke and a handcuff. 

And my heart bled within me; for you can only be free when even the desire of 
seeking freedom becomes a harness to you, and when you cease to speak of 
freedom as a goal and a fulfilment. 

You shall be free indeed when your days are not without a care nor your nights 
without a want and a grief, 

But rather when these things girdle your life and yet you rise above them 
naked and unbound. 

And how shall you rise beyond your days and nights unless you break the 
chains which you at the dawn of your understanding have fastened around your 
noon hour? 

In truth that which you call freedom is the strongest of these chains, though its 
links glitter in the sun and dazzle your eyes. 

And what is it but fragments of your own self you would discard that you may 
become free? 

If it is an unjust law you would abolish, that law was written with your own 
hand upon your own forehead. 

You cannot erase it by burning your law books nor by washing the foreheads 
of your judges, though you pour the sea upon them. 


And if it is a despot you would dethrone, see first that his throne erected within 
you is destroyed. 

For how can a tyrant rule the free and the proud, but for a tyranny in their own 
freedom and a shame in their own pride? 

And if it is a care you would cast off, that care has been chosen by you rather 
than imposed upon you. 

And if it is a fear you would dispel, the seat of that fear is in your heart and not 
in the hand of the feared. 

Verily all things move within your being in constant half embrace, the desired 
and the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished, the pursued and that which 
you would escape. 

These things move within you as lights and shadows in pairs that cling. 

And when the shadow fades and is no more, the light that lingers becomes a 
shadow to another light. 

And thus your freedom when it loses its fetters becomes itself the fetter of a 
greater freedom. 


Reason and Passion 
OO = = C) 


And the priestess spoke again and said: “Speak to us of Reason and Passion.” 

And he answered, saying: 

Your soul is oftentimes a battlefield, upon which your reason and your 
judgement wage war against your passion and your appetite. 

Would that I could be the peacemaker in your soul, that I might turn the 
discord and the rivalry of your elements into oneness and melody. 

But how shall I, unless you yourselves be also the peacemakers, nay, the lovers 
of all your elements? 

Your reason and your passion are the rudder and the sails of your seafaring 
soul. 

If either your sails or your rudder be broken, you can but toss and drift, or else 
be held at a standstill in mid-seas. 

For reason, ruling alone, is a force confining; and passion, unattended, is a 
flame that burns to its own destruction. 

Therefore, let your soul exalt your reason to the height of passion, that it may 
sing; 

And let it direct your passion with reason, that your passion may live through 
its own daily resurrection, and like the phoenix rise above its own ashes. 

I would have you consider your judgment and your appetite even as you would 
two loved guests in your house. 

Surely you would not honour one guest above the other; for he who is more 
mindful of one loses the love and the faith of both. 

Among the hills, when you sit in the cool shade of the white poplars, sharing 
the peace and serenity of distant fields and meadows — then let your heart say in 
silence, “God rests in reason.” 

And when the storm comes, and the mighty wind shakes the forest, and 


thunder and lightning proclaim the majesty of the sky — then let your heart say in 
awe, “God moves in passion.” 

And since you are a breath in God’s sphere, and a leaf in God’s forest, you too 
should rest in reason and move in passion. 


Pain 


And a woman spoke, saying, “Tell us of Pain.” 

And he said: 

Your pain is the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding. 

Even as the stone of the fruit must break, that its heart may stand in the sun, so 
must you know pain. 

And could you keep your heart in wonder at the daily miracles of your life, 
your pain would not seem less wondrous than your joy; 


And you would accept the seasons of your heart, even as you have always 
accepted the seasons that pass over your fields. 


And you would watch with serenity through the winters of your grief. 


Much of your pain is self-chosen. 

It is the bitter potion by which the physician within you heals your sick self. 

Therefore trust the physician, and drink his remedy in silence and tranquillity: 

For his hand, though heavy and hard, is guided by the tender hand of the 
Unseen, 


And the cup he brings, though it burn your lips, has been fashioned of the clay 
which the Potter has moistened with His own sacred tears. 


Self-Knowledge 


And a man said, “Speak to us of Self-Knowledge.” 
And he answered, saying: 
Your hearts know in silence the secrets of the days and the nights. 
But your ears thirst for the sound of your heart’s knowledge. 
You would know in words that which you have always known in thought. 
You would touch with your fingers the naked body of your dreams. 
And it is well you should. 


The hidden well-spring of your soul must needs rise and run murmuring to the 
sea; 


And the treasure of your infinite depths would be revealed to your eyes. 
But let there be no scales to weigh your unknown treasure; 

And seek not the depths of your knowledge with staff or sounding line. 
For self is a sea boundless and measureless. 

Say not, “I have found the truth,” but rather, “I have found a truth.” 


Say not, “I have found the path of the soul.” Say rather, “I have met the soul 
walking upon my path.” 


For the soul walks upon all paths. 
The soul walks not upon a line, neither does it grow like a reed. 
The soul unfolds itself, like a lotus of countless petals. 


Teaching 
(2 — a C) 


Then said a teacher, “Speak to us of Teaching.” 

And he said: 

No man can reveal to you aught but that which already lies half asleep in the 
dawning of your knowledge. 

The teacher who walks in the shadow of the temple, among his followers, 
gives not of his wisdom but rather of his faith and his lovingness. 

If he is indeed wise he does not bid you enter the house of his wisdom, but 
rather leads you to the threshold of your own mind. 

The astronomer may speak to you of his understanding of space, but he cannot 
give you his understanding. 

The musician may sing to you of the rhythm which is in all space, but he 
cannot give you the ear which arrests the rhythm, nor the voice that echoes it. 

And he who is versed in the science of numbers can tell of the regions of 
weight and measure, but he cannot conduct you thither. 

For the vision of one man lends not its wings to another man. 

And even as each one of you stands alone in God’s knowledge, so must each 
one of you be alone in his knowledge of God and in his understanding of the 
earth. 


Friendship 


2 C 


| , 


And a youth said, “Speak to us of Friendship.” 
And he answered, saying: 
Your friend is your needs answered. 
He is your field which you sow with love and reap with thanksgiving. 
And he is your board and your fireside. 
For you come to him with your hunger, and you seek him for peace. 


When your friend speaks his mind you fear not the “nay” in your own mind, 
nor do you withhold the “ay.” 


And when he is silent your heart ceases not to listen to his heart; 


For without words, in friendship, all thoughts, all desires, all expectations are 
born and shared, with joy that is unacclaimed. 


When you part from your friend, you grieve not; 


For that which you love most in him may be clearer in his absence, as the 
mountain to the climber is clearer from the plain. 


And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening of the spirit. 


For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of its own mystery is not love but 
a net cast forth: and only the unprofitable is caught. 


And let your best be for your friend. 

If he must know the ebb of your tide, let him know its flood also. 
For what is your friend that you should seek him with hours to kill? 
Seek him always with hours to live. 

For it is his to fill your need, but not your emptiness. 


And in the sweetness of friendship let there be laughter, and sharing of 
pleasures. 


For in the dew of little things the heart finds its morning and is refreshed. 


Talking 
(2 — = C) 


And then a scholar said, “Speak of Talking.” 

And he answered, saying: 

You talk when you cease to be at peace with your thoughts; 

And when you can no longer dwell in the solitude of your heart you live in 
your lips, and sound is a diversion and a pastime. 

And in much of your talking, thinking is half murdered. 

For thought is a bird of space, that in a cage of words man indeed unfold its 
wings but cannot fly. 

There are those among you who seek the talkative through fear of being alone. 

The silence of aloneness reveals to their eyes their naked selves and they 
would escape. 

And there are those who talk, and without knowledge or forethought reveal a 
truth which they themselves do not understand. 


And there are those who have the truth within them, but they tell it not in 
words. 

In the bosom of such as these the spirit dwells in rhythmic silence. 

When you meet your friend on the roadside or in the market-place, let the 
spirit in you move your lips and direct your tongue. 

Let the voice within your voice speak to the ear of his ear; 


For his soul will keep the truth of your heart as the taste of the wine is 
remembered. 


When the colour is forgotten and the vessel is no more. 


Time 


And an astronomer said, “Master, what of Time?” 
And he answered: 
You would measure time the measureless and the immeasurable. 


You would adjust your conduct and even direct the course of your spirit 
according to hours and seasons. 

Of time you would make a stream upon whose bank you would sit and watch 
its flowing. 

Yet the timeless in you is aware of life’s timelessness, 


And knows that yesterday is but today’s memory and tomorrow is today’s 
dream. 

And that that which sings and contemplates in you is still dwelling within the 
bounds of that first moment which scattered the stars into space. 

Who among you does not feel that his power to love is boundless? 


And yet who does not feel that very love, though boundless, encompassed 
within the centre of his being, and moving not from love thought to love thought, 
nor from love deeds to other love deeds? 


And is not time even as love is, undivided and paceless? 


But if in you thought you must measure time into seasons, let each season 
encircle all the other seasons, 


And let today embrace the past with remembrance and the future with longing. 


Good and Evil 


And one of the elders of the city said, “Speak to us of Good and Evil.” 
And he answered: 
Of the good in you I can speak, but not of the evil. 
For what is evil but good tortured by its own hunger and thirst? 


Verily when good is hungry it seeks food even in dark caves, and when it 
thirsts, it drinks even of dead waters. 


You are good when you are one with yourself. 
Yet when you are not one with yourself you are not evil. 
For a divided house is not a den of thieves; it is only a divided house. 


And a ship without rudder may wander aimlessly among perilous isles yet sink 
not to the bottom. 


You are good when you strive to give of yourself. 

Yet you are not evil when you seek gain for yourself. 

For when you strive for gain you are but a root that clings to the earth and 
sucks at her breast. 

Surely the fruit cannot say to the root, “Be like me, ripe and full and ever 
giving of your abundance.” 

For to the fruit giving is a need, as receiving is a need to the root. 

You are good when you are fully awake in your speech. 

Yet you are not evil when you sleep while your tongue staggers without 
purpose. 

And even stumbling speech may strengthen a weak tongue. 

You are good when you walk to your goal firmly and with bold steps. 

Yet you are not evil when you go thither limping. 

Even those who limp go not backwards. 

But you who are strong and swift, see that you do not limp before the lame, 
deeming it kindness. 

You are good in countless ways, and you are not evil when you are not good. 

You are only loitering and sluggard. 

Pity that the stags cannot teach swiftness to the turtles. 

In your longing for your giant self lies your goodness: and that longing is in all 
of you. 

But in some of you that longing is a torrent rushing with might to the sea, 
carrying the secrets of the hillsides and the songs of the forest. 

And in others it is a flat stream that loses itself in angles and bends and lingers 
before it reaches the shore. 

But let not him who longs much say to him who longs little, “Wherefore are 
you slow and halting?” 

For the truly good ask not the naked, “Where is your garment?” nor the 
houseless, “What has befallen your house?” 


Prayer 


Then a Priestess said, “Speak to us of Prayer.” 

And he answered, saying: 

You pray in your distress and in your need; would that you might pray also in 
the fullness of your joy and in your days of abundance. 

For what is prayer but the expansion of yourself into the living ether? 

And if it is for your comfort to pour your darkness into space, it is also for 
your delight to pour forth the dawning of your heart. 

And if you cannot but weep when your soul summons you to prayer, she 
should spur you again and yet again, though weeping, until you shall come 
laughing. 

When you pray you rise to meet in the air those who are praying at that very 
hour, and whom save in prayer you may not meet. 

Therefore let your visit to that temple invisible be for naught but ecstasy and 
sweet communion. 


For if you should enter the temple for no other purpose than asking you shall 
not receive. 


And if you should enter into it to humble yourself, you shall not be lifted: 


Or even if you should enter into it to beg for the good of others you shall not 
be heard. 

It is enough that you enter the temple invisible. 

I cannot teach you how to pray in words. 

God listens not to your words save when He Himself utters them through your 
lips. 

And I cannot teach you the prayer of the seas and the forests and the 
mountains. 

But you who are born of the mountains and the forests and the seas can find 


their prayer in your heart, 


And if you but listen in the stillness of the night you shall hear them saying in 
silence, 


“Our God, who art our winged self, it is thy will in us that willeth. 
It is thy desire in us that desireth. 


It is thy urge in us that would turn our nights, which are thine, into days, which 
are thine also. 

We cannot ask thee for aught, for thou knowest our needs before they are born 
in us: 

Thou art our need; and in giving us more of thyself thou givest us all.” 


Pleasure 
OO ~ = C) 


Then a hermit, who visited the city once a year, came forth and said, “Speak to 
us of Pleasure.” 

And he answered, saying: 

Pleasure is a freedom-song, 

But it is not freedom. 

It is the blossoming of your desires, 

But it is not their fruit. 

It is a depth calling unto a height, 

But it is not the deep nor the high. 

It is the caged taking wing, 

But it is not space encompassed. 

Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-song. 

And I fain would have you sing it with fullness of heart; yet I would not have 
you lose your hearts in the singing. 


Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it were all, and they are judged and 
rebuked. 


I would not judge nor rebuke them. I would have them seek. 
For they shall find pleasure, but not her alone; 
Seven are her sisters, and the least of them is more beautiful than pleasure. 


Have you not heard of the man who was digging in the earth for roots and 
found a treasure? 


And some of your elders remember pleasures with regret like wrongs 
committed in drunkenness. 
But regret is the beclouding of the mind and not its chastisement. 


They should remember their pleasures with gratitude, as they would the 
harvest of a summer. 


Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them be comforted. 

And there are among you those who are neither young to seek nor old to 
remember; 

And in their fear of seeking and remembering they shun all pleasures, lest they 
neglect the spirit or offend against it. 

But even in their foregoing is their pleasure. 

And thus they too find a treasure though they dig for roots with quivering 
hands. 

But tell me, who is he that can offend the spirit? 

Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of the night, or the firefly the stars? 

And shall your flame or your smoke burden the wind? 

Think you the spirit is a still pool which you can trouble with a staff? 

Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure you do but store the desire in the 
recesses of your being. 

Who knows but that which seems omitted today, waits for tomorrow? 

Even your body knows its heritage and its rightful need and will not be 
deceived. 

And your body is the harp of your soul, 

And it is yours to bring forth sweet music from it or confused sounds. 

And now you ask in your heart, “How shall we distinguish that which is good 
in pleasure from that which is not good?” 

Go to your fields and your gardens, and you shall learn that it is the pleasure of 
the bee to gather honey of the flower. 

But it is also the pleasure of the flower to yield its honey to the bee. 

For to the bee a flower is a fountain of life, 

And to the flower a bee is a messenger of love, 

And to both, bee and flower, the giving and the receiving of pleasure is a need 
and an ecstasy. 

People of Orphalese, be in your pleasures like the flowers and the bees. 


Beauty 
'e a a C) 


And a poet said, “Speak to us of Beauty.” 

And he answered : 

Where shall you seek beauty, and how shall you find her unless she herself be 
your way and your guide? 

And how shall you speak of her except she be the weaver of your speech? 

The aggrieved and the injured say, “Beauty is kind and gentle. 

Like a young mother half-shy of her own glory she walks among us.” 

And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is a thing of might and dread. 

Like the tempest she shakes the earth beneath us and the sky above us.” 

The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is of soft whisperings. She speaks in our 
spirit. 

Her voice yields to our silences like a faint light that quivers in fear of the 
shadow.” 

But the restless say, “We have heard her shouting among the mountains, 

And with her cries came the sound of hoofs, and the beating of wings and the 
roaring of lions.” 

At night the watchmen of the city say, “Beauty shall rise with the dawn from 
the east.” 

And at noontide the toilers and the wayfarers say, “We have seen her leaning 
over the earth from the windows of the sunset.” 

In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall come with the spring leaping upon 
the hills.” 

And in the summer heat the reapers say, “We have seen her dancing with the 
autumn leaves, and we saw a drift of snow in her hair.” 

All these things have you said of beauty, 

Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of needs unsatisfied, 


And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy. 

It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty hand stretched forth, 
But rather a heart inflamed and a soul enchanted. 

It is not the image you would see nor the song you would hear, 


But rather an image you see though you close your eyes and a song you hear 
though you shut your ears. 


It is not the sap within the furrowed bark, nor a wing attached to a claw, 

But rather a garden for ever in bloom and a flock of angels for ever in flight. 
People of Orphalese, beauty is life when life unveils her holy face. 

But you are life and you are the veil. 

Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mirror. 

But you are eternity and you are the mirror. 


Religion 


Seassrr—S 2. 


And an old priest said, “Speak to us of Religion.” 

And he said: 

Have I spoken this day of aught else? 

Is not religion all deeds and all reflection, 

And that which is neither deed nor reflection, but a wonder and a surprise ever 
springing in the soul, even while the hands hew the stone or tend the loom? 

Who can separate his faith from his actions, or his belief from his occupations? 

Who can spread his hours before him, saying, “This for God and this for 
myself; This for my soul and this other for my body?” 

All your hours are wings that beat through space from self to self. 


He who wears his morality but as his best garment were better naked. 

The wind and the sun will tear no holes in his skin. 

And he who defines his conduct by ethics imprisons his song-bird in a cage. 
The freest song comes not through bars and wires. 


And he to whom worshipping is a window, to open but also to shut, has not yet 
visited the house of his soul whose windows are from dawn to dawn. 


Your daily life is your temple and your religion. 
Whenever you enter into it take with you your all. 

Take the plough and the forge and the mallet and the lute, 
The things you have fashioned in necessity or for delight. 


For in reverie you cannot rise above your achievements nor fall lower than 
your failures. 

And take with you all men: 

For in adoration you cannot fly higher than their hopes nor humble yourself 
lower than their despair. 

And if you would know God, be not therefore a solver of riddles. 

Rather look about you and you shall see Him playing with your children. 

And look into space; you shall see Him walking in the cloud, outstretching His 
arms in the lightning and descending in rain. 

You shall see Him smiling in flowers, then rising and waving His hands in 
trees. 


Death 
OO = = C) 


Then Almitra spoke, saying, “We would ask now of Death.” 

And he said: 

You would know the secret of death. 

But how shall you find it unless you seek it in the heart of life? 

The owl whose night-bound eyes are blind unto the day cannot unveil the 
mystery of light. 


If you would indeed behold the spirit of death, open your heart wide unto the 
body of life. 

For life and death are one, even as the river and the sea are one. 

In the depth of your hopes and desires lies your silent knowledge of the 
beyond; 

And like seeds dreaming beneath the snow your heart dreams of spring. 

Trust the dreams, for in them is hidden the gate to eternity. 

Your fear of death is but the trembling of the shepherd when he stands before 
the king whose hand is to be laid upon him in honour. 

Is the shepherd not joyful beneath his trembling, that he shall wear the mark of 
the king? 

Yet is he not more mindful of his trembling? 

For what is it to die but to stand naked in the wind and to melt into the sun? 


And what is it to cease breathing but to free the breath from its restless tides, 
that it may rise and expand and seek God unencumbered? 


Only when you drink from the river of silence shall you indeed sing. 
And when you have reached the mountain top, then you shall begin to climb. 
And when the earth shall claim your limbs, then shall you truly dance. 


The Farewell 


2 


And now it was evening. 


And Almitra the seeress said, “Blessed be this day and this place and your 
spirit that has spoken.” 


And he answered, Was it I who spoke? 
Was I not also a listener? 


Then he descended the steps of the Temple and all the people followed him. 
And he reached his ship and stood upon the deck. 


And facing the people again, he raised his voice and said: 

People of Orphalese, the wind bids me leave you. 

Less hasty am I than the wind, yet I must go. 

We wanderers, ever seeking the lonelier way, begin no day where we have 
ended another day; and no sunrise finds us where sunset left us. 

Even while the earth sleeps we travel. 


We are the seeds of the tenacious plant, and it is in our ripeness and our 
fullness of heart that we are given to the wind and are scattered. 


Brief were my days among you, and briefer still the words I have spoken. 


But should my voice fade in your ears, and my love vanish in your memory, 
then I will come again, 


And with a richer heart and lips more yielding to the spirit will I speak. 
Yea, I shall return with the tide, 


And though death may hide me, and the greater silence enfold me, yet again 
will I seek your under-standing. 


And not in vain will I seek. 


If aught I have said is truth, that truth shall reveal itself in a clearer voice, and 
in words more kin to your thoughts. 


I go with the wind, people of Orphalese, but not down into emptiness; 


And if this day is not a fulfilment of your needs and my love, then let it be a 
promise till another day. 

Man’s needs change, but not his love, nor his desire that his love should satisfy 
his needs. 

Know, therefore, that from the greater silence I shall return. 

The mist that drifts away at dawn, leaving but dew in the fields, shall rise and 
gather into a cloud and then fall down in rain. 

And not unlike the mist have I been. 

In the stillness of the night I have walked in your streets, and my spirit has 
entered your houses, 

And your heartbeats were in my heart, and your breath was upon my face, and 
I knew you all. 

Ay, I knew your joy and your pain, and in your sleep your dreams were my 
dreams. 

And oftentimes I was among you a lake among the mountains. 

I mirrored the summits in you and the bending slopes, and even the passing 
flocks of your thoughts and your desires. 

And to my silence came the laughter of your children in streams, and the 
longing of your youths in rivers. 

And when they reached my depth the streams and the rivers ceased not yet to 
sing. 

But sweeter still than laughter and greater than longing came to me. 

It was the boundless in you; 

The vast man in whom you are all but cells and sinews; 

He in whose chant all your singing is but a soundless throbbing. 

It is in the vast man that you are vast, 

And in beholding him that I beheld you and loved you. 

For what distances can love reach that are not in that vast sphere? 

What visions, what expectations and what presumptions can outsoar that 
flight? 

Like a giant oak tree covered with apple blossoms is the vast man in you. 

His might binds you to the earth, his fragrance lifts you into space, and in his 
durability you are deathless. 

You have been told that, even like a chain, you are as weak as your weakest 


link. 

This is but half the truth. You are also as strong as your strongest link. 

To measure you by your smallest deed is to reckon the power of ocean by the 
frailty of its foam. 

To judge you by your failures is to cast blame upon the seasons for their 
inconstancy. 

Ay, you are like an ocean, 

And though heavy-grounded ships await the tide upon your shores, yet, even 
like an ocean, you cannot hasten your tides. 

And like the seasons you are also, 

And though in your winter you deny your spring, 

Yet spring, reposing within you, smiles in her drowsiness and is not offended. 

Think not I say these things in order that you may say the one to the other, “He 
praised us well. He saw but the good in us.” 

I only speak to you in words of that which you yourselves know in thought. 

And what is word knowledge but a shadow of wordless knowledge? 

Your thoughts and my words are waves from a sealed memory that keeps 
records of our yesterdays, 

And of the ancient days when the earth knew not us nor herself, 

And of nights when earth was upwrought with confusion. 

Wise men have come to you to give you of their wisdom. I came to take of 
your wisdom: 

And behold I have found that which is greater than wisdom. 

It is a flame spirit in you ever gathering more of itself, 

While you, heedless of its expansion, bewail the withering of your days. 

It is life in quest of life in bodies that fear the grave. 

There are no graves here. 

These mountains and plains are a cradle and a stepping-stone. 

Whenever you pass by the field where you have laid your ancestors look well 
thereupon, and you shall see yourselves and your children dancing hand in hand. 

Verily you often make merry without knowing. 

Others have come to you to whom for golden promises made unto your faith 
you have given but riches and power and glory. 

Less than a promise have I given, and yet more generous have you been to me. 


You have given me my deeper thirsting after life. 

Surely there is no greater gift to a man than that which turns all his aims into 
parching lips and all life into a fountain. 

And in this lies my honour and my reward — 

That whenever I come to the fountain to drink I find the living water itself 
thirsty; 

And it drinks me while I drink it. 


Some of you have deemed me proud and over-shy to receive gifts. 

Too proud indeed am I to receive wages, but not gifts. 

And though I have eaten berries among the hills when you would have had me 
sit at your board, 

And slept in the portico of the temple where you would gladly have sheltered 
me, 

Yet it was not your loving mindfulness of my days and my nights that made 
food sweet to my mouth and girdled my sleep with visions? 

For this I bless you most: 

You give much and know not that you give at all. 

Verily the kindness that gazes upon itself in a mirror turns to stone, 


And a good deed that calls itself by tender names becomes the parent to a 
curse. 


And some of you have called me aloof, and drunk with my own aloneness, 


And you have said, “He holds council with the trees of the forest, but not with 
men. 


He sits alone on hill-tops and looks down upon our city.” 

True it is that I have climbed the hills and walked in remote places. 
How could I have seen you save from a great height or a great distance? 
How can one be indeed near unless he be far? 

And others among you called unto me, not in words, and they said: 


“Stranger, stranger, lover of unreachable heights, why dwell you among the 
summits where eagles build their nests? 


Why seek you the unattainable? 

What storms would you trap in your net, 

And what vaporous birds do you hunt in the sky? 
Come and be one of us. 


Descend and appease your hunger with our bread and quench your thirst with 
our wine.” 

In the solitude of their souls they said these things; 

But were their solitude deeper they would have known that I sought but the 
secret of your joy and your pain, 

And I hunted only your larger selves that walk the sky. 


But the hunter was also the hunted; 

For many of my arrows left my bow only to seek my own breast. 

And the flier was also the creeper; 

For when my wings were spread in the sun their shadow upon the earth was a 
turtle. 

And I the believer was also the doubter; 

For often have I put my finger in my own wound that I might have the greater 
belief in you and the greater knowledge of you. 

And it is with this belief and this knowledge that I say, 

You are not enclosed within your bodies, nor confined to houses or fields. 

That which is you dwells above the mountain and roves with the wind. 

It is not a thing that crawls into the sun for warmth or digs holes into darkness 
for safety, 

But a thing free, a spirit that envelops the earth and moves in the ether. 

If these be vague words, then seek not to clear them. 

Vague and nebulous is the beginning of all things, but not their end, 

And I fain would have you remember me as a beginning. 

Life, and all that lives, is conceived in the mist and not in the crystal. 

And who knows but a crystal is mist in decay? 

This would I have you remember in remembering me: 

That which seems most feeble and bewildered in you is the strongest and most 
determined. 

It is not your breath that has erected and hardened the structure of your bones? 

And is it not a dream which none of you remember having dreamt, that 
builded your city and fashioned all there is in it? 

Could you but see the tides of that breath you would cease to see all else, 

And if you could hear the whispering of the dream you would hear no other 
sound. 

But you do not see, nor do you hear, and it is well. 

The veil that clouds your eyes shall be lifted by the hands that wove it, 

And the clay that fills your ears shall be pierced by those fingers that kneaded 
it. 

And you shall see. 

And you shall hear. 


Yet you shall not deplore having known blindness, nor regret having been 
deaf. 


For in that day you shall know the hidden purposes in all things. 
And you shall bless darkness as you would bless light. 


After saying these things he looked about him, and he saw the pilot of his ship 
standing by the helm and gazing now at the full sails and now at the distance. 

And he said: 

Patient, over patient, is the captain of my ship. 

The wind blows, and restless are the sails; 

Even the rudder begs direction; 

Yet quietly my captain awaits my silence. 

And these my mariners, who have heard the choir of the greater sea, they too 
have heard me patiently. 

Now they shall wait no longer. 

I am ready. 


The stream has reached the sea, and once more the great mother holds her son 
against her breast. 


Fare you well, people of Orphalese. 

This day has ended. 

It is closing upon us even as the water-lily upon its own tomorrow. 
What was given us here we shall keep, 


And if it suffices not, then again must we come together and together stretch 
our hands unto the giver. 

Forget not that I shall come back to you. 

A little while, and my longing shall gather dust and foam for another body. 

A little while, a moment of rest upon the wind, and another woman shall bear 
me. 

Farewell to you and the youth I have spent with you. 

It was but yesterday we met in a dream. 

You have sung to me in my aloneness, and I of your longings have built a 
tower in the sky. 

But now our sleep has fled and our dream is over, and it is no longer dawn. 


The noontide is upon us and our half waking has turned to fuller day, and we 
must part. 


If in the twilight of memory we should meet once more, we shall speak again 
together and you shall sing to me a deeper song. 

And if our hands should meet in another dream we shall build another tower in 
the sky. 

So saying he made a signal to the seamen, and straight away they weighed 
anchor and cast the ship loose from its moorings, and they moved eastward. 

And a cry came from the people as from a single heart, and it rose into the 
dusk and was carried out over the sea like a great trumpeting. 

Only Almitra was silent, gazing after the ship until it had vanished into the 
mist. 

And when all the people were dispersed she still stood alone upon the sea- 
wall, remembering in her heart his saying: 

“A little while, a moment of rest upon the wind, and another woman shall bear 


+” 


me. 


SAND AND FOAM 
(2 5 = C) 


I am forever walking upon these shores, 
Betwixt the sand and the foam, 

The high tide will erase my foot-prints, 
And the wind will blow away the foam. 
But the sea and the shore will remain 
Forever. 


Once I filled my hand with mist. 
Then I opened it and lo, the mist was a worm. 
And I closed and opened my hand again, and behold there was a bird. 
And again I closed and opened my hand, and in its hollow stood a man with a 
sad face, turned upward. 
And again I closed my hand, and when I opened it there was naught but mist. 
But I heard a song of exceeding sweetness. 
o 
It was but yesterday I thought myself a fragment quivering without rhythm in 
the sphere of life. 
Now I know that I am the sphere, and all life in rhythmic fragments moves 
within me. 
* 
They say to me in their awakening, “You and the world you live in are but a 
grain of sand upon the infinite shore of an infinite sea.” 
And in my dream I say to them, “I am the infinite sea, and all worlds are but 
grains of sand upon my shore.” 


* 


Only once have I been made mute. It was when a man asked me, “Who are 


you?” 
ok 
The first thought of God was an angel. 
The first word of God was a man. 


* 


We were fluttering, wandering, longing creatures a thousand thousand years 
before the sea and the wind in the forest gave us words. 
Now how can we express the ancient of days in us with only the sounds of our 
yesterdays? 
x 
The Sphinx spoke only once, and the Sphinx said, “A grain of sand is a desert, 
and a desert is a grain of sand; and now let us all be silent again.” 
I heard the Sphinx, but I did not understand. 
oK 
Long did I lie in the dust of Egypt, silent and unaware of the seasons. 
Then the sun gave me birth, and I rose and walked upon the banks of the Nile, 
Singing with the days and dreaming with the nights. 
And now the sun threads upon me with a thousand feet that I may lie again in 
the dust of Egypt. 
But behold a marvel and a riddle! 
The very sun that gathered me cannot scatter me. 
Still erect am I, and sure of foot do I walk upon the banks of the Nile. 


* 


Remembrance is a form of meeting. 


Forgetfulness is a form of freedom. 
ok 


We measure time according to the movement of countless suns; and they 
measure time by little machines in their little pockets. 
Now tell me, how could we ever meet at the same place and the same time? 


* 


Space is not space between the earth and the sun to one who looks down from 
the windows of the Milky Way. 


Humanity is a river of light running from the ex-eternity to eternity. 
3K 


Do not the spirits who dwell in the ether envy man his pain? 
kK 

On my way to the Holy City I met another pilgrim and I asked him, “Is this 
indeed the way to the Holy City?” 

And he said, “Follow me, and you will reach the Holy City in a day and a 
night.” 

And I followed him. And we walked many days and many nights, yet we did 
not reach the Holy City. 

And what was to my surprise he became angry with me because he had misled 
me. 


* 


Make me, oh God, the prey of the lion, ere. You make the rabbit my prey. 


* 


One may not reach the dawn save by the path of the night. 

ok 

My house says to me, “Do not leave me, for here dwells your past.” 

And the road says to me, “Come and follow me, for I am your future.” 

And I say to both my house and the road, “I have no past, nor have I a future. 
If I stay here, there is a going in my staying; and if I go there is a staying in my 
going. Only love and death will change all things.” 

kK 

How can I lose faith in the justice of life, when the dreams of those who sleep 
upon feathers are not more beautiful than the dreams of those who sleep upon 
the earth? Strange, the desire for certain pleasures is a part of my pain. 

Kk 

Seven times have I despised my soul: 

The first time when I saw her being meek that she might attain height. 

The second time when I saw her limping before the crippled. 

The third time when she was given to choose between the hard and the easy, 
and she chose the easy. 

The fourth time when she committed a wrong, and comforted herself that 
others also commit wrong. 


The fifth time when she forbore for weakness, and attributed her patience to 
strength. 
The sixth time when she despised the ugliness of a face, and knew not that it 
was one of her own masks. 
And the seventh time when she sang a song of praise, and deemed it a virtue. 
ok 
I am ignorant of absolute truth. But I am humble before my ignorance and 
therein lies my honor and my reward. 
ok 
There is a space between man’s imagination and man’s attainment that may 
only be traversed by his longing. 
ok 
Paradise is there, behind that door, in the next room; but I have lost the key. 
Perhaps I have only mislaid it. 


* 


You are blind and I am deaf and dumb, so let us touch hands and understand. 
ok 
The significance of man is not in what he attains, but rather in what he longs to 
attain. 
ok 
Some of us are like ink and some like paper. 
And if it were not for the blackness of some of us, some of us would be dumb; 
And if it were not for the whiteness of some of us, some of us would be blind. 


* 


Give me an ear and I will give you a voice. 
ok 
Our mind is a sponge; our heart is a stream. 


Is it not strange that most of us choose sucking rather than running? 
ok 


When you long for blessings that you may not name, and when you grieve 
knowing not the cause, then indeed you are growing with all things that grow, 


and rising toward your greater self. 
ok 


When one is drunk with a vision, he deems his faint expression of it the very 


wine. 
3K 


You drink wine that you may be intoxicated; and I drink that it may sober me 
from that other wine. 
ok 


When my cup is empty I resign myself to its emptiness; but when it is half full 
I resent its half-fulness. 
ok 


The reality of the other person is not in what he reveals to you, but in what he 
cannot reveal to you. 


Therefore, if you would understand him, listen not to what he says but rather 
to what he does not say. 
ok 


Half of what I say is meaningless; but I say it so that the other half may reach 


you. 
ok 


A sense of humour is a sense of proportion. 
ok 


My loneliness was born when men praised my talkative faults and blamed my 
silent virtues. 
ok 


When Life does not find a singer to sing her heart she produces a philosopher 
to speak her mind. 
ok 


A truth is to be known always, to be uttered sometimes. 
ok 


The real in us is silent; the acquired is talkative. 
ok 


The voice of life in me cannot reach the ear of life in you; but let us talk that 
we may not feel lonely. 
ok 


When two women talk they say nothing; when one woman speaks she reveals 
all of life. 


Frogs may bellow louder than bulls, but they cannot drag the plough in the 
field not turn the wheel of the winepress, and of their skins you cannot make 
shoes. 

ok 


Only the dumb envy the talkative. 


* 


If winter should say, “Spring is in my heart,” who would believe winter? 
ok 


Every seed is a longing. 
ok 


Should you really open your eyes and see, you would behold your image in all 
images. 
And should you open your ears and listen, you would hear your own voice in 


all voices. 
3K 


It takes two of us to discover truth: one to utter it and one to understand it. 
ok 


Though the wave of words is forever upon us, yet our depth is forever silent. 
ok 


Many a doctrine is like a window pane. We see truth through it but it divides 
us from truth. 
ok 


Now let us play hide and seek. Should you hide in my heart it would not be 
difficult to find you. But should you hide behind your own shell, then it would 


be useless for anyone to seek you. >A woman may veil her face with a smile. 
ok 


How noble is the sad heart who would sing a joyous song with joyous hearts. 
ok 


He who would understand a woman, or dissect genius, or solve the mystery of 
silence is the very man who would wake from a beautiful dream to sit at a 
breakfast table. 


* 


I would walk with all those who walk. I would not stand still to watch the 
procession passing by. 


* 


You owe more than gold to him who serves you. Give him of your heart or 


serve him. 
ok 


Nay, we have not lived in vain. Have they not built towers of our bones? 
ok 


Let us not be particular and sectional. The poet’s mind and the scorpion’s tail 


rise in glory from the same earth. 
ok 


Every dragon gives birth to a St. George who slays it. 


* 


Trees are poems that the earth writes upon the sky. We fell them down and turn 


them into paper that we may record our emptiness. 
ok 


Should you care to write (and only the saints know why you should) you must 
needs have knowledge and art and music—the knowledge of the music of words, 


the art of being artless, and the magic of loving your readers. 
ok 


They dip their pens in our hearts and think they are inspired. 


* 


Should a tree write its autobiography it would not be unlike the history of a 


race. 
* 


If I were to choose between the power of writing a poem and the ecstasy of a 
poem unwritten, I would choose the ecstasy. It is better poetry. 
But you and all my neighbors agree that I always choose badly. 
ok 
Poetry is not an opinion expressed. It is a song that rises from a bleeding 
wound or a smiling mouth. 
ok 
Words are timeless. You should utter them or write them with a knowledge of 
their timelessness. 


* 


A poet is a dethroned king sitting among the ashes of his palace trying to 


fashion an image out of the ashes. 
ok 


Poetry is a deal of joy and pain and wonder, with a dash of the dictionary. 
ok 


In vain shall a poet seek the mother of the songs of his heart. 

ok 

Once I said to a poet, “We shall not know your worth until you die.” 

And he answered saying, “Yes, death is always the revealer. And if indeed you 
would know my worth it is that I have more in my heart than upon my tongue, 
and more in my desire than in my hand.” 

ok 

If you sing of beauty though alone in the heart of the desert you will have an 

audience. 
ok 

Poetry is wisdom that enchants the heart. 

Wisdom is poetry that sings in the mind. 

If we could enchant man’s heart and at the same time sing in his mind, 

Then in truth he would live in the shadow of God. 


* 


Inspiration will always sing; inspiration will never explain. 
ok 


We often sing lullabies to our children that we ourselves may sleep. 
ok 


All our words are but crumbs that fall down from the feast of the mind. 
ok 


Thinking is always the stumbling stone to poetry. 
ok 


A great singer is he who sings our silences. 
ok 


How can you sing if your mouth be filled with food? 
How shall your hand be raised in blessing if it is filled with gold? 


* 


They say the nightingale pierces his bosom with a thorn when he sings his 


love song. 


So do we all. How else should we sing? 
ok 


Genius is but a robin’s song at the beginning of a slow spring. 
ok 


Even the most winged spirit cannot escape physical necessity. 
ok 


A madman is not less a musician than you or myself; only the instrument on 
which he plays is a little out of tune. 
ok 


The song that lies silent in the heart of a mother sings upon the lips of her 
child. 


* 


No longing remains unfulfilled. 
ok 


I have never agreed with my other self wholly. The truth of the matter seems to 


lie between us. 
ok 


Your other self is always sorry for you. But your other self grows on sorrow; 
so all is well. 
ok 


There is no struggle of soul and body save in the minds of those whose souls 
are asleep and whose bodies are out of tune. 
ok 


When you reach the heart of life you shall find beauty in all things, even in the 
eyes that are blind to beauty. 


* 


We live only to discover beauty. All else is a form of waiting. 
ok 


Sow a Seed and the earth will yield you a flower. Dream your dream to the sky 
and it will bring you your beloved. 
ok 
The devil died the very day you were born. 
Now you do not have to go through hell to meet an angel. 


* 


Many a woman borrows a man’s heart; very few could possess it. 
ok 


If you would possess you must not claim. 
ok 


When a man’s hand touches the hand of a woman they both touch the heart of 
eternity. 


* 


Love is the veil between lover and lover. 
ok 
Every man loves two women; the one is the creation of his imagination, and 
the other is not yet born. 
ok 
Men who do not forgive women their little faults will never enjoy their great 
virtues. 
ok 
Love that does not renew itself every day becomes a habit and in turn a 
slavery. 


* 


Lovers embrace that which is between them rather than each other. 
ok 


Love and doubt have never been on speaking terms. 
ok 


Love is a word of light, written by a hand of light, upon a page of light. 


* 


Friendship is always a sweet responsibility, never an opportunity. 
ok 


If you do not understand your friend under all conditions you will never 
understand him. 


* 
Your most radiant garment is of the other person’s weaving; 

You most savory meal is that which you eat at the other person’s table; 
Your most comfortable bed is in the other person’s house. 

Now tell me, how can you separate yourself from the other person? 


* 


Your mind and my heart will never agree until your mind ceases to live in 


numbers and my heart in the mist. 
ok 


We shall never understand one another until we reduce the language to seven 


words. 
ok 


How shall my heart be unsealed unless it be broken? 
ok 


Only great sorrow or great joy can reveal your truth. 


If you would be revealed you must either dance naked in the sun, or carry your 


cross. 
* 


Should nature heed what we say of contentment no river would seek the sea, 
and no winter would turn to Spring. Should she heed all we say of thrift, how 


many of us would be breathing this air? 
ok 


You see but your shadow when you turn your back to the sun. 
ok 
You are free before the sun of the day, and free before the stars of the night; 
And you are free when there is no sun and no moon and no star. 
You are even free when you close your eyes upon all there is. 
But you are a slave to him whom you love because you love him, 
And a slave to him who loves you because he loves you. 


* 


We are all beggars at the gate of the temple, and each one of us receives his 
share of the bounty of the King when he enters the temple, and when he goes 
out. 

But we are all jealous of one another, which is another way of belittling the 
King. 

ok 
You cannot consume beyond your appetite. The other half of the loaf belongs 


to the other person, and there should remain a little bread for the chance guest. 
ok 


If it were not for your guests all houses would be graves. 
ok 


Said a gracious wolf to a simple sheep, “Will you not honor our house with a 
visit?” 
And the sheep answered, “We would have been honored to visit your house if 


it were not in your stomach.” 
ok 


I stopped my guest on the threshold and said, “Nay, wipe not your feet as you 


enter, but as you go out.” 
3K 


Generosity is not in giving me that which I need more than you do, but it is in 


giving me that which you need more than I do. 
ok 


You are indeed charitable when you give, and while giving, turn your face 
away so that you may not see the shyness of the receiver. 
ok 
The difference between the richest man and the poorest is but a day of hunger 
and an hour of thirst. 


* 


We often borrow from our tomorrows to pay our debts to our yesterdays. 
ok 

I too am visited by angels and devils, but I get rid of them. 

When it is an angel I pray an old prayer, and he is bored; 

When it is a devil I commit an old sin, and he passes me by. 


* 


After all this is not a bad prison; but I do not like this wall between my cell 
and the next prisoner’s cell; 
Yet I assure you that I do not wish to reproach the warder not the Builder of 


the prison. 
ok 


Those who give you a serpent when you ask for a fish, may have nothing but 


serpents to give. It is then generosity on their part. 
3K 


Trickery succeeds sometimes, but it always commits suicide. 


* 


You are truly a forgiver when you forgive murderers who never spill blood, 
thieves who never steal, and liars who utter no falsehood. 
ok 


He who can put his finger upon that which divides good from evil is he who 
can touch the very hem of the garment of God. 
ok 


If your heart is a volcano how shall you expect flowers to bloom in your 
hands? 
ok 


A strange form of self-indulgence! There are times when I would be wronged 
and cheated, that I may laugh at the expense of those who think I do not know I 


am being wronged and cheated. 
ok 


What shall I say of him who is the pursuer playing the part of the pursued? 


* 


Let him who wipes his soiled hands with your garment take your garment. He 
may need it again; surely you would not. 
ok 


It is a pity that money-changers cannot be good gardeners. 
ok 


Please do not whitewash your inherent faults with your acquired virtues. I 
would have the faults; they are like mine own. 
ok 
How often have I attributed to myself crimes I have never committed, so that 
the other person may feel comfortable in my presence. 


* 


Even the masks of life are masks of deeper mystery. 

ok 
You may judge others only according to your knowledge of yourself. 
Tell me now, who among us is guilty and who is unguilty? 


* 


The truly just is he who feels half guilty of your misdeeds. 


* 


Only an idiot and a genius break man-made laws; and they are the nearest to 
the heart of God. 


* 


It is only when you are pursued that you become swift. 
ok 


I have no enemies, O God, but if I am to have an enemy 
Let his strength be equal to mine, 
That truth alone may be the victor. 


* 


You will be quite friendly with your enemy when you both die. 
ok 


Perhaps a man may commit suicide in self-defense. 
ok 


Long ago there lived a Man who was crucified for being too loving and too 
lovable. 

And strange to relate I met him thrice yesterday. 

The first time He was asking a policeman not to take a prostitute to prison; the 
second time He was drinking wine with an outcast; and the third time He was 


having a fist-fight with a promoter inside a church. 
ok 


If all they say of good and evil were true, then my life is but one long crime. 
ok 


Pity is but half justice. 


* 


The only one who has been unjust to me is the one to whose brother I have 


been unjust. 
ok 


When you see a man led to prison say in your heart, “Mayhap he is escaping 
from a narrower prison.” 
And when you see a man drunken say in your heart, “Mayhap he sought 
escape from something still more unbeautiful.” 
ok 


Oftentimes I have hated in self-defense; but if I were stronger I would not have 
used such a weapon. 


* 


How stupid is he who would patch the hatred in his eyes with the smile of his 
lips. 
ok 
Only those beneath me can envy or hate me. 
I have never been envied nor hated; I am above no one. 
Only those above me can praise or belittle me. 
I have never been praised nor belittled; I am below no one. 
ok 
Your saying to me, “I do not understand you,” is praise beyond my worth, and 
an insult you do not deserve. How mean am I when life gives me gold and I give 


you silver, and yet I deem myself generous. 
ok 


When you reach the heart of life you will find yourself not higher than the 
felon, and not lower than the prophet. 
ok 
Strange that you should pity the slow-footed and not the slow-minded, 
And the blind-eyed rather than the blind-hearted. 


* 


It is wiser for the lame not to break his crutches upon the head of his enemy. 
ok 


How blind is he who gives you out of his pocket that he may take out of your 
heart. 
ok 
Life is a procession. The slow of foot finds it too swift and he steps out; 
And the swift of foot finds it too slow and he too steps out. 
ok 
If there is such a thing as sin some of us commit it backward following our 
forefathers’ footsteps; 
And some of us commit it forward by overruling our children. 


* 


The truly good is he who is one with all those who are deemed bad. 
ok 


We are all prisoners but some of us are in cells with windows and some 


without. 
ok 


Strange that we all defend our wrongs with more vigor than we do our rights. 
ok 


Should we all confess our sins to one another we would all laugh at one 
another for our lack of originality. Should we all reveal our virtues we would 


also laugh for the same cause. 
ok 


An individual is above man-made laws until he commits a crime against man- 
made conventions; 
After that he is neither above anyone nor lower than anyone. 


* 


Government is an agreement between you and myself. You and myself are 
often wrong. 
ok 


Crime is either another name of need or an aspect of a disease. 
ok 


Is there a greater fault than being conscious of the other person’s faults? 
ok 


If the other person laughs at you, you can pity him; but if you laugh at him you 
may never forgive yourself. 


If the other person injures you, you may forget the injury; but if you injure him 
you will always remember. 
In truth the other person is your most sensitive self given another body. 


* 


How heedless you are when you would have men fly with your wings and you 


cannot even give them a feather. 
ok 


Once a man sat at my board and ate my bread and drank my wine and went 
away laughing at me. 

Then he came again for bread and wine, and I spurned him; 

And the angels laughed at me. 


* 


Hate is a dead thing. Who of you would be a tomb? 


* 


It is the honor of the murdered that he is not the murderer. 
ok 


The tribune of humanity is in its silent heart, never its talkative mind. 
ok 


They deem me mad because I will not sell my days for gold; 


And I deem them mad because they think my days have a price. 
ok 


They spread before us their riches of gold and silver, of ivory and ebony, and 
we spread before them our hearts and our spirits.; 
And yet they deem themselves the hosts and us the guests. 


* 


I would not be the least among men with dreams and the desire to fulfill them, 


rather than the greatest with no dreams and no desires. 
ok 


The most pitiful among men is he who turns his dreams into silver and gold. 
ok 


We are all climbing toward the summit of our hearts’ desire. Should the other 
climber steal your sack and your purse and wax fat on the one and heavy on the 
other, you should pity him; 

The climbing will be harder for his flesh, and the burden will make his way 
longer. 

And should you in your leanness see his flesh puffing upward, help him a step; 


it will add to your swiftness. 
ok 


You cannot judge any man beyond your knowledge of him, and how small is 


your knowledge. 
ok 


I would not listen to a conqueror preaching to the conquered. 
ok 


The truly free man is he who bears the load of the bond slave patiently. 
ok 


A thousand years ago my neighbor said to me, “I hate life, for it is naught but a 
thing of pain.” 


And yesterday I passed by a cemetery and saw life dancing upon his grave. 
ok 


Strife in nature is but disorder longing for order. 
ok 


Solitude is a silent storm that breaks down all our dead branches; 


Yet it sends our living roots deeper into the living heart of the living earth. 
ok 


Once I spoke of the sea to a brook, and the brook thought me but an 
imaginative exaggerator; 


And once I spoke of a brook to the sea, and the sea thought me but a 
depreciative defamer. 
ok 


How narrow is the vision that exalts the busyness of the ant above the singing 
of the grasshopper. 


* 


The highest virtue here may be the least in another world. 
ok 


The deep and the high go to the depth or to the height in a straight line; only 
the spacious can move in circles. 
ok 


If it were not for our conception of weights and measures we would stand in 
awe of the firefly as we do before the sun. 
ok 


A scientist without imagination is a butcher with dull knives and out-worn 
scales. 


But what would you, since we are not all vegetarians? 
ok 


When you sing the hungry hears you with his stomach. 
ok 


Death is not nearer to the aged than to the new-born; neither is life. 
ok 


If indeed you must be candid, be candid beautifully; otherwise keep silent, for 
there is a man in our neighborhood who is dying. 
ok 


Mayhap a funeral among men is a wedding feast among the angels. 
ok 


A forgotten reality may die and leave in its will seven thousand actualities and 


facts to be spent in its funeral and the building of a tomb. 
ok 


In truth we talk only to ourselves, but sometimes we talk loud enough that 


others may hear us. 
ok 


The obvious is that which is never seen until someone expresses it simply. 
ok 


If the Milky Way were not within me how should I have seen it or known it? 
ok 


Unless I am a physician among physicians they would not believe that I am an 


astronomer. 
* 


Perhaps the sea’s definition of a shell is the pearl. 
Perhaps time’s definition of coal is the diamond. 


* 


Fame is the shadow of passion standing in the light. 
ok 


A root is a flower that disdains fame. 
ok 


There is neither religion nor science beyond beauty. 
ok 


Every great man I have known had something small in his make-up; and it was 


that small something which prevented inactivity or madness or suicide. 
ok 


The truly great man is he who would master no one, and who would be 


mastered by none. 
ok 


I would not believe that a man is mediocre simply because he kills the 


criminals and the prophets. 
ok 


Tolerance is love sick with the sickness of haughtiness. 


* 


Worms will turn; but is it not strange that even elephants will yield? 
ok 


A disagreement may be the shortest cut between two minds. 
ok 


I am the flame and I am the dry bush, and one part of me consumes the other 
part. 


* 


We are all seeking the summit of the holy moutain; but shall not our road be 


shorter if we consider the past a chart and not a guide? 
ok 


Wisdom ceases to be wisdom when it becomes too proud to weep, too grave to 


laugh, and too self-ful to seek other than itself. 
ok 


Had I filled myself with all that you know what room should I have for all that 
you do not know? 
ok 


I have learned silence from the talkative, toleration from the intolerant, and 


kindness from the unkind; yet strange, I am ungrateful to these teachers. 
ok 


A bigot is a stone-leaf orator. 
ok 


The silence of the envious is too noisy. 
ok 


When you reach the end of what you should know, you will be at the 


beginning of what you should sense. 
ok 


An exaggeration is a truth that has lost its temper. 
ok 


If you can see only what light reveals and hear only what sound announces, 


Then in truth you do not see nor do you hear. 
ok 


A fact is a truth unsexed. 


You cannot laugh and be unkind at the same time. 
ok 


The nearest to my heart are a king without a kingdom and a poor man who 


does not know how to beg. 
ok 


A shy failure is nobler than an immodest success. 
ok 


Dig anywhere in the earth and you will find a treasure, only you must dig with 
the faith of a peasant. 
ok 


Said a hunted fox followed by twenty horsemen and a pack of twenty hounds, 
“Of course they will kill me. But how poor and how stupid they must be. Surely 
it would not be worthwhile for twenty foxes riding on twenty asses and 


accompanied by twenty wolves to chase and kill one man.” 
ok 


It is the mind in us that yields to the laws made by us, but never the spirit in 
us. 
ok 
A traveler am I and a navigator, and every day I discover a new region within 
my soul. 
ok 
A woman protested saying, “Of course it was a righteous war. My son fell in 
it.” 
ok 
I said to Life, “I would hear Death speak.” 
And Life raised her voice a little higher and said, “You hear him now.” 
ok 
When you have solved all the mysteries of life you long for death, for it is but 
another mystery of life. 


* 


Birth and death are the two noblest expressions of bravery. 
ok 


My friend, you and I shall remain strangers unto life, 
And unto one another, and each unto himself, 


Until the day when you shall speak and I shall listen 
Deeming your voice my own voice; 
And when I shall stand before you 
Thinking myself standing before a mirror. 
kK 
They say to me, “Should you know yourself you would know all men.” 
And I say, “Only when I seek all men shall I know myself.” 


* 


Man is two men; one is awake in darkness, the other is asleep in light. 
ok 


A hermit is one who renounces the world of fragments that he may enjoy the 
world wholly and without interruption. 
ok 


There lies a green field between the scholar and the poet; should the scholar 

cross it he becomes a wise man; should the poet cross it, he becomes a prophet. 
oK 

Yester eve I saw philosophers in the market-place carrying their heads in 
baskets, and crying aloud, “Wisdom! Wisdom for sale!” 

Poor philosophers! They must needs sell their heads to feed their hearts. >Said 
a philosopher to a street sweeper, “I pity you. Yours is a hard and dirty task.” 

And the street sweeper said, “Thank you, sir. But tell me what is your task?” 

And the philosopher answered saying, “I study man’s mind, his deeds and his 
desires.” 

Then the street sweeper went on with his sweeping and said with a smile, “I 
pity you too.” 


* 


He who listens to truth is not less than he who utters truth. 
ok 


No man can draw the line between necessities and luxuries. Only the angels 
can do that, and the angels are wise and wistful. 
Perhaps the angels are our better thought in space. 


* 


He is the true prince who finds his throne in the heart of the dervish. 
ok 


Generosity is giving more than you can, and pride is taking less than you need. 
ok 


In truth you owe naught to any man. You owe all to all men. 
ok 


All those who have lived in the past live with us now. Surely none of us would 
be an ungracious host. 
ok 


He who longs the most lives the longest. 
ok 


They say to me, “A bird in the hand is worth ten in the bush.” 


But I say, “A bird and a feather in the bush is worth more than ten birds in the 
hand.” 


Your seeking after that feather is life with winged feet; nay, it is life itself. 
ok 


There are only two elements here, beauty and truth; beauty in the hearts of 
lovers, and truth in the arms of the tillers of the soil. 
ok 


Great beauty captures me, but a beauty still greater frees me even from itself. 
ok 


Beauty shines brighter in the heart of him who longs for it than in the eyes of 
him who sees it. 
ok 


I admire him who reveals his mind to me; I honor him who unveils his dreams. 
But why am I shy, and even a little ashamed before him who serves me? 


ok 
The gifted were once proud in serving princes. 


Now they claim honor in serving paupers. 
ok 


The angels know that too many practical men eat their bread with the sweat of 
the dreamer’s brow. 
ok 


Wit is often a mask. If you could tear it you would find either a genius irritated 
or cleverness juggling. 


The understanding attributes to me understanding and the dull, dullness. I 
think they are both right. 


* 


Only those with secrets in their hearts could divine the secrets in our hearts. 
ok 


He who would share your pleasure but not your pain shall lose the key to one 


of the seven gates of Paradise. 
ok 


Yes, there is a Nirvanah; it is in leading your sheep to a green pasture, and in 


putting your child to sleep, and in writing the last line of your poem. 
ok 


We choose our joys and our sorrows long before we experience them. 
ok 


Sadness is but a wall between two gardens. 
ok 


When either your joy or your sorrow becomes great the world becomes small. 
ok 


Desire is half of life; indifference is half of death. 
ok 


The bitterest thing in our today’s sorrow is the memory of our yesterday’s joy. 
ok 


They say to me, “You must needs choose between the pleasures of this world 
and the peace of the next world.” 

And I say to them, “I have chosen both the delights of this world and the peace 
of the next. For I know in my heart that the Supreme Poet wrote but one poem, 


and it scans perfectly, and it also rhymes perfectly.” 
ok 


Faith is an oasis in the heart which will never be reached by the caravan of 
thinking. 
ok 
When you reach your height you shall desire but only for desire; and you shall 


hunger, for hunger; and you shall thirst for greater thirst. 
ok 


If you reveal your secrets to the wind you should not blame the wind for 


revealing them to the trees. 
ok 


The flowers of spring are winter’s dreams related at the breakfast table of the 
angels. 
ok 


Said a skunk to a tube-rose, “See how swiftly I run, while you cannot walk nor 
even creep.” 

Said the tube-rose to the skunk, “Oh, most noble swift runner, please run 
swiftly!” 


* 


Turtles can tell more about roads than hares. 
ok 


Strange that creatures without backbones have the hardest shells. 
ok 


The most talkative is the least intelligent, and there is hardly a difference 


between an orator and an auctioneer. 
ok 


Be grateful that you do not have to live down the renown of a father nor the 
wealth of an uncle. 

But above all be grateful that no one will have to live down either your renown 
or your wealth. 


* 


Only when a juggler misses catching his ball does he appeal to me. 
ok 


The envious praises me unknowingly. 
ok 


Long were you a dream in your mother’s sleep, and then she woke to give you 
birth. 


* 


The germ of the race is in your mother’s longing. 
ok 
My father and mother desired a child and they begot me. 
And I wanted a mother and a father and I begot night and the sea. 


* 


Some of our children are our justifications and some are but our regrets. 
ok 


When night comes and you too are dark, lie down and be dark with a will. 

And when morning comes and you are still dark stand up and say to the day 
with a will, “I am still dark.” 

It is stupid to play a role with the night and the day. 

They would both laugh at you. 


* 


The mountain veiled in mist is not a hill; an oak tree in the rain is not a 
weeping willow. 
ok 
Behold here is a paradox; the deep and high are nearer to one another than the 


mid-level to either. 
ok 


When I stood a clear mirror before you, you gazed into me and saw your 
image. 
Then you said, “I love you.” 


But in truth you loved yourself in me. 
ok 


When you enjoy loving your neighbor it ceases to be a virtue. 
ok 


Love which is not always springing is always dying. 

kK 

You cannot have youth and the knowledge of it at the same time; 

For youth is too busy living to know, and knowledge is too busy seeking itself 
to live. You may sit at your window watching the passersby. And watching you 
may see a nun walking toward your right hand, and a prostitute toward your left 
hand. 

And you may say in your innocence, “How noble is the one and how ignoble 
is the other.” 

But should you close your eyes and listen awhile you would hear a voice 
whispering in the ether, “One seeks me in prayer, and the other in pain. And in 


the spirit of each there is a bower for my spirit.” 
ok 


Once every hundred years Jesus of Nazareth meets Jesus of the Christian in a 
garden among the hills of Lebanon. And they talk long; and each time Jesus of 
Nazareth goes away saying to Jesus of the Christian, “My friend, I fear we shall 
never, never agree.” 


May God feed the over-abundant! 


* 


A great man has two hearts; one bleeds and the other forbears. 
ok 


Should one tell a lie which does not hurt you nor anyone else, why not say in 
your heart that the house of his facts is too small for his fancies, and he had to 


leave it for larger space? 
ok 


Behind every closed door is a mystery sealed with seven seals. 
ok 


Waiting is the hoofs of time. 
ok 


What if trouble should be a new window in the Eastern wall of your house? 
ok 


You may forget the one with whom you have laughed, but never the one with 


whom you have wept. 
ok 


There must be something strangely sacred in salt. It is in our tears and in the 


S@d. 
* 


Our God in His gracious thirst will drink us all, the dewdrop and the tear. 
ok 


You are but a fragment of your giant self, a mouth that seeks bread, and a blind 
hand that holds the cup for a thirsty mouth. 


* 


If you would rise but a cubit above race and country and self you would 


indeed become godlike. 
ok 


If I were you I would not find fault with the sea at low tide. 


It is a good ship and our Captain is able; it is only your stomach that is in 


disorder. 
ok 


Should you sit upon a cloud you would not see the boundary line between one 
country and another, nor the boundary stone between a farm and a farm. 


It is a pity you cannot sit upon a cloud. 
ok 


Seven centuries ago seven white doves rose from a deep valley flying to the 
snow-white summit of the mountain. One of the seven men who watched the 
flight said, “I see a black spot on the wing of the seventh dove.” 

Today the people in that valley tell of seven black doves who flew to the 


summit of the snowy mountain. 
ok 


In the autumn I gathered all my sorrows and buried them in my garden. 

And when April returned and spring came to wed the earth, there grew in my 
garden beautiful flowers unlike all other flowers. 

And my neighbors came to behold them, and they all said to me, “When 
autumn comes again, at seeding time, will you not give us of the seeds of these 


flowers that we may have them in our gardens?” 
ok 


It is indeed misery if I stretch an empty hand to men and receive nothing; but it 


is hopelessness if I stretch a full hand and find none to receive. 
ok 


I long for eternity because there I shall meet my unwritten poems and my 


unpainted pictures. 
ok 


Art is a step from nature toward the Infinite. 
ok 


A work of art is a mist carved into an image. 
ok 


Even the hands that make crowns of thorns are better than idle hands. 
ok 


Our most sacred tears never seek our eyes. 
* 


Every man is the descendant of every king and every slave that ever lived. 
ok 


If the great-grandfather of Jesus had known what was hidden within him, 
would he not have stood in awe of himself? 
ok 


Was the love of Judas’ mother of her son less than the love of Mary for Jesus? 
ok 
There are three miracles of our Brother Jesus not yet recorded in the Book: the 
first that He was a man like you and me, the second that He had a sense of 
humour, and the third that He knew He was a conqueror though conquered. 
ok 
Crucified One, you are crucified upon my heart; and the nails that pierce your 
hands pierce the walls of my heart. 
And tomorrow when a stranger passes by this Golgotha he will not know that 
two bled here. 
He will deem it the blood of one man. 
* 
You may have heard of the Blessed Mountain. 
It is the highest mountain in our world. 
Should you reach the summit you would have only one desire, and that to 
descend and be with those who dwell in the deepest valley. 
That is why it is called the Blessed Mountain. 


* 


Every thought I have imprisoned in expression I must free by my deeds. 
ok 


SATAN 
(QO ~ = C) 


The people looked upon Father Samaan as their guide in the field of spiritual and 
theological matters, for he was an authority and a source of deep information on 
venial and mortal sins, well versed in the secrets of paradise, hell, and purgatory. 

Father Samaan’s mission in North Lebanon was to travel from one village to 
another, preaching and curing the people from the spiritual disease of sin, and 
saving them from the horrible trap of Satan. The Reverend Father waged 
constant war with Satan. The fellahin honoured and respected this clergyman, 
and were always anxious to buy his advice or prayers with pieces of gold and 
silver; and at every harvest they would present him with the finest fruits of their 
fields. 

One evening in autumn, as Father Samaan walked his way towards a solitary 
village, crossing those valleys and hills, he heard a painful cry emerging from a 
ditch at the side of the road. He stopped and looked in the direction of the voice, 
and saw an unclothed man lying on the ground. Streams of blood oozed from 
deep wounds in his head and chest. He was moaning painfully for aid, 
saying, “Save me, help me. Have mercy on me, I am dying.” Father Samaan 
looked with perplexity at the sufferer, and said within himself, “This man must 
be a thief. He probably tried to rob the wayfarers and failed. Someone has 
wounded him, and I fear that should he die I may be accused of having taken his 
life.” 

Having thus pondered the situation, he resumed his journey, whereupon the 
dying man stopped him, calling out, “Do not leave me! I am dying!” Then the 
Father meditated again, and his face became pale as he realized he was refusing 
to help. His lips quivered, but he spoke to himself, saying, “He must surely be 
one of the madmen wandering in the wilderness. The sight of his wounds brings 
fear into my heart; what shall I do? Surely a spiritual doctor is not capable of 
treating flesh-wounded bodies.” Father Samaan walked ahead a few paces when 
the near-corpse uttered a painful plaint that melted the heart of the rock and he 


gasped, “Come close to me! Come, for we have been friends a long time. You 
are Father Samaan, the good shepherd, and I am not a thief nor a madman. Come 
close, and do not let me die in this deserted place. Come, and I will tell you who 
I am.” 

Father Samaan came close to the man, knelt, and stared at him; but he saw a 
strange face with contrasting features; he saw intelligence with slyness, ugliness 
with beauty, and wickedness with softness. He withdrew to his feet sharply, and 
exclaimed, “Who are you?” 

With a fainting voice, the dying man said, “Fear me not, Father, for we have 
been strong friends for long. Help me to stand, and take me to the nearby 
streamlet and cleanse my wounds with your linens.” And the Father inquired, 
“Tell me who you are, for I do not know you, nor even remember having seen 
you.” 

And the man replied with an agonizing voice, “You know my identity! You 
have seen me one thousand times and you speak of me each day. I am dearer to 
you than your own life.” And the Father reprimanded, “You are a lying imposter! 
A dying man should tell the truth. I have never seen your evil face in my entire 
life. Tell me who you are, or I will suffer you to die, soaked in your escaping 
life.” And the wounded man moved slowly and looked into the clergyman’s 
eyes, and upon his lips appeared a mystic smile; and in a quiet, deep and smooth 
voice he said, “I am Satan.” 

Upon hearing the fearful word, Father Samaan uttered a terrible cry that shook 
the far corners of the valley; then he stared, and realized that the dying man’s 
body, with its grotesque distortions, coincided with the likeness of Satan in a 
religious picture hanging on the wall of the village church. He trembled and 
cried out, saying, “God has shown me your hellish image and justly caused me 
to hate you; cursed be you for evermore! The mangled lamb must be destroyed 
by the shepherd lest he will infect the other lambs!” 

Satan answered, “Be not in haste, Father, and lose not this fleeting time in 
empty talk. Come and close my wounds quickly, before life departs from my 
body.” And the clergyman retorted, “The hands which offer a daily sacrifice to 
God shall not touch a body made of the secretion of hell. You must die accursed 
by the tongues of the ages, and the lips of humanity, for you are the enemy of 
humanity, and it is your avowed purpose to destroy all virtue.” 

Satan moved in anguish, raising himself upon one elbow, and responded, “You 
know not what you are saying, nor understand the crime you are committing 


upon yourself. Give heed, for I will relate my story. Today I walked alone in this 
solitary valley. When I reached this place, a group of angels descended to attack, 
and struck me severely; had it not been for one of them, who carried a blazing 
sword with two sharp edges, I would have driven them off, but I had no power 
against the brilliant sword.” And Satan ceased talking for a moment, as he 
pressed a shaking hand upon a deep wound in his side. Then he continued, “The 
armed angel—I believe he was Michael—was an expert gladiator. Had I not 
thrown myself to the friendly ground and feigned to have been slain, he would 
have torn me into brutal death.” 

With voice of triumph, and casting his eyes heavenwards, the Father offered, 
“Blessed be Michael’s name, who has saved humanity from this vicious enemy.” 

And Satan protested, “My disdain for humanity is not greater than your hatred 
for yourself. You are blessing Michael, who never has come to your rescue. You 
are cursing me in the hour of my defeat, even though I was, and still am, the 
source of your tranquility and happiness. You deny me your blessing, and extend 
not your kindness, but you live and prosper in the shadow of my being. You have 
adopted my existence as an excuse and weapon for your career, and you employ 
my name in justification for your deeds. Has not my past caused you to be in 
need of my present and future? Have you reached your goal in amassing the 
required wealth? Have you found it impossible to extract more gold and silver 
from your followers, using my kingdom as a threat? 

“Do you not realize that you will starve to death if I were to die? What would 
you do tomorrow if you allowed me to die today? What vocation would you 
pursue if my name disappeared? For decades you have been roaming these 
villages and warning the people against falling into my hands. They have bought 
your advice with their poor dinars and with the products of their land. What 
would they buy from you tomorrow, if they discovered that their wicked enemy 
no longer existed? Your occupation would die with me, for the people would be 
safe from sin. As a clergyman, do you not realize that Satan’s existence alone 
has created his enemy, the Church? That ancient conflict is the secret hand which 
removes the gold and silver from the faithful’s pocket and deposits it forever into 
the pouch of the preacher and the missionary. How can you permit me to die 
here, when you know it will surely cause you to lose your prestige, your church, 
your home, and your livelihood?” 

Satan became silent for a moment and his humility was now converted into a 
confident independence, and he continued, “Father, you are proud, but ignorant. 
I will disclose to you the history of belief, and in it you will find the truth which 


joins both of our beings, and ties my existence with your very conscience. 

“Tn the first hour of the beginning of time, man stood before the face of the sun 
and stretched forth his arms and cried for the first time, saying, ‘Behind the sky 
there is a great and loving and benevolent God.’ The man turned his back to the 
great circle of light and saw his shadow upon the earth, and he hailed, ‘In the 
depths of the earth there is a dark evil who loves wickedness.’ 

“And the man walked towards his cave, whispering to himself, “I am between 
two compelling forces, one in whom I must take refuge, and the other against 
whom I must struggle.’ And the ages marched in procession while man existed 
between two powers, one that he blessed because it exalted him, and one that he 
cursed because it frightened him. But he never perceived the meaning of a 
blessing or of a curse; he was between the two, like a tree between summer, 
when it blooms, and winter, when it shivers. 

“When a man saw the dawn of civilization, which is human understanding, the 
family as a unit came into being. Then came the tribes, whereupon labour was 
divided according to ability and inclination; one clan cultivated the land, another 
built shelters, others wove raiment or hunted food. Subsequently divination 
made its appearance upon the earth, and this was the first career adopted by man 
which possessed no essential urge or necessity.” 

Satan ceased talking for a moment. Then he laughed and his mirth shook the 
empty valley, but his laughter reminded him of his wounds, and he placed his 
hand on his side, suffering with pain. He steadied himself and continued, 
“Divination appeared and grew on earth in strange fashion. 

“There was a man in the first tribe called La Wiss. I know not the origin of his 
name. He was an intelligent creature, but extremely indolent and he detested 
work in the cultivation of land, construction of shelters, grazing of cattle, or any 
pursuit requiring bodily movement or exertion. And since food, during that era, 
could not be obtained except by arduous toil, La Wiss slept many nights with an 
empty stomach. 

“One summer night, as the members of that clan were gathered round the hut 
of their chief, talking of the outcome of their day and waiting for their slumber 
time, a man suddenly leaped to his feet, pointed towards the moon, and cried out, 
saying, ‘Look at the night god! His face is dark, and his beauty has vanished, and 
he has turned into a black stone hanging in the dome of the sky!’ The multitude 
gazed at the moon, shouted in awe, and shook with fear, as if the hands of 
darkness had clutched their hearts, for they saw the night god slowly turning into 


a dark ball which changed the bright countenance of the earth and caused the 
hills and valleys before their eyes to disappear behind a black veil. 

“At that moment, La Wiss, who had seen an eclipse before, and understood its 
simple cause, stepped forward to make much of this opportunity. He stood in the 
midst of the throng, lifted his hands to the sky, and in a strong voice he 
addressed them, saying, ‘Kneel and pray, for the evil god of obscurity is locked 
in struggle with the illuminating night god; if the evil god conquers him, we will 
all perish, but if the night god triumphs over him, we will remain alive. Pray now 
and worship. Cover your faces with earth. Close your eyes, and lift not your 
heads towards the sky, for he who witnesses the two gods wrestling will lose his 
sight and mind, and will remain blind and insane all his life! Bend your heads 
low, and with all your hearts urge the night god against his enemy, who is our 
mortal enemy!’ 

“Thus did La Wiss continue talking, using many cryptic words of his own 
fabrication which they had never heard. After this crafty deception, as the moon 
returned to its previous glory, La Wiss raised his voice louder than before and 
said impressively, ‘Rise now, and look at the night god who has triumphed over 
his evil enemy. He is resuming his journey among the stars. Let it be known that 
through your prayers you have helped him to overcome the devil of darkness. He 
is well pleased now, and brighter than ever.’ 

“The multitude rose and gazed at the moon that was shining in full beam. 
Their fear became tranquility, and their confusion was now joy. They 
commenced dancing and singing and striking with their thick sticks upon sheets 
of iron, filling the valleys with their clamour and shouting. 

“That night, the chief of the tribe called La Wiss and spoke to him, saying, 
“You have done something that no man has ever done. You have demonstrated 
knowledge of a hidden secret that no other among us understands. Reflecting the 
will of my people, you are to be the highest ranking member, after me, in the 
tribe. I am the strongest man, and you are the wisest and most learned person. 
You are the medium between our people and the gods, whose desires and deeds 
you are to interpret, and you will teach us those things necessary to gain their 
blessings and love.’ 

“And La Wiss slyly assured, ‘Everything the human god reveals to me in my 
divine dreams will be conveyed to you in awakeness, and you may be confident 
that I will act directly between you and him.’ The chief was assured, and gave La 
Wiss two horses, seven calves, seventy sheep and seventy lambs; and he spoke 


to him, saying, “The men of the tribe shall build for you a strong house, and we 
will give you at the end of each harvest season a part of the crop of the land so 
you may live as an honourable and respected master.’ 

“La Wiss rose and started to leave, but the chief stopped him, saying, ‘Who 
and what is the one whom you call the human god? Who is this daring god who 
wrestles with the glorious night god? We have never pondered him before.’ La 
Wiss rubbed his forehead and answered him, saying, ‘My honourable master, in 
the olden time, before the creation of man, all the gods were living peacefully 
together in an upper world behind the vastness of the stars. The god of gods was 
their father, and knew what they did not know, and did what they were unable to 
do. He kept for himself the divine secrets that existed beyond the eternal laws. 
During the seventh epoch of the twelfth age, the spirit of Bahtaar, who hated the 
great god, revolted and stood before his father, and said, ‘Why do you keep for 
yourself the power of great authority upon all creatures, hiding away from us the 
secrets and laws of the universe? Are we not your children who believe in you 
and share with you the great understanding and the perpetual being?’ 

“The god of gods became enraged and said, ‘I shall preserve for myself the 
primary power and the great authority and the essential secrets, for I am the 
beginning and the end.’ 

“And Bahtaar answered him saying, ‘Unless you share with me your might 
and power, I and my children and my children’s children will revolt against you!’ 
At that moment, the god of gods stood upon his throne in the deep heavens, and 
drew forth a sword, and grasped the sun as a shield; and with a voice that shook 
all corners of the eternity he shouted out, saying, ‘Descend, you evil rebel, to the 
dismal lower world where darkness and misery exist! There you shall remain in 
exile, wandering until the sun turns into ashes and the stars into dispersed 
particles!’ In that hour, Bahtaar descended from the upper world into the lower 
world, where all the evil spirits dwelt. Thereupon, he swore by the secret of life 
that he would fight his father and brothers by trapping every soul who loved 
them.’ 

“As the chief listened, his forehead wrinkled and his face turned pale. He 
ventured, “Then the name of the evil god is Bahtaar?’ and La Wiss responded, 
‘His name was Bahtaar when he was in the upper world, but when he entered 
into the lower world, he adopted successively the names Baalzaboul, Satanail, 
Balial, Zamiel, Ahriman, Mara, Abdon, Devil, and finally Satan, which is the 
most famous.’ 


“The chief repeated the word Satan many times with a quivering voice that 
sounded like the rustling of the dry branches at the passing of the wind; then he 
asked, ‘Why does Satan hate man as much as he hates the gods?’ 

“And La Wiss responded quickly, ‘He hates man because man is a descendant 
of Satan’s brothers and sisters.” The chief exclaimed, “Then Satan is the cousin 
of man!’ In a voice mingled with confusion and annoyance, he retorted, ‘Yes, 
master, but he is their great enemy who fills their days with misery and their 
nights with horrible dreams. He is the power who directs the tempest towards 
their hovels, and brings famine upon their plantation, and disease upon them and 
their animals. He is an evil and powerful god; he is wicked, and he rejoices when 
we are in sorrow, and he mourns when we are joyous. We must, through my 
knowledge, examine him thoroughly, in order to avoid his evil; we must study 
his character, so we will not step upon his trap-laden path.’ 

“The chief leaned his head upon his thick stick and whispered, saying, ‘I have 
learned now the inner secret of that strange power who directs the tempest 
towards our homes and brings the pestilence upon us and our cattle. The people 
shall learn all that I have comprehended now, and La Wiss will be blessed, 
honoured and glorified for revealing to them the mystery of their powerful 
enemy, and directing them away from the road of evil.’ 

“And La Wiss left the chief of the tribe and went to his retiring place, happy 
over his ingenuity, and intoxicated with the wine of his pleasure and fancy. For 
the first time, the chief and all the tribe, except La Wiss, spent the night 
slumbering in beds surrounded by horrible ghosts, fearful spectres, and 
disturbing dreams.” 

Satan ceased talking for a moment, while Father Samaan stared at him as one 
bewildered, and upon the Father’s lips appeared the sickly laughter of death. 
Then Satan continued, “Thus divination came to this earth, and thus was my 
existence the cause for its appearance. La Wiss was the first who adopted my 
cruelty as a vocation. After the death of La Wiss, this occupation circulated 
through his children and prospered until it became a perfect and divine 
profession, pursued by those whose minds are ripe with knowledge, and whose 
souls are noble, and whose hearts are pure, and whose fancy is vast. 

“In Babylon, the people bowed seven times in worshipping before a priest who 
fought me with his chantings. In Nineveh, they looked upon a man, who claimed 
to have known my inner secrets, as a golden link between God and man. In 
Tibet, they called the person who wrestled with me the son of the sun and moon. 


In Byblus, Ephesus and Antioch, they offered their children’s lives in sacrifice to 
my opponents. In Jerusalem and Rome, they placed their lives in the hands of 
those who claimed they hated me and fought me with all their might. 

“In every city under the sun my name was the axis of the educational circle of 
religion, arts, and philosophy. Had it not been for me, no temples would have 
been built, no towers or palaces would have been erected. I am the courage that 
creates resolution in man. I am the source that provokes originality of thought. I 
am the hand that moves man’s hands. I am Satan everlasting. I am Satan whom 
people fight in order to keep themselves alive. If they cease struggling against 
me, slothfulness will deaden their minds and hearts and souls, in accordance 
with the weird penalties of their tremendous myth. 

“T am the enraged and mute tempest who agitates the minds of man and the 
hearts of women. And in fear of me, they will travel to places of worship to 
condemn me, or to places of vice to make me happy by surrendering to my will. 
The monk who prays in the silence of the night to keep me away from his bed is 
like the prostitute who invites me to her chamber. I am Satan everlasting and 
eternal. 

“T am the builder of convents and monasteries upon the foundation of fear. I 
build wine shops and wicked houses upon the foundations of lust and self- 
gratification. If I cease to exist, fear and enjoyment will be abolished from the 
world, and through their disappearance, desires and hopes will cease to exist in 
the human heart. Life will become empty and cold, like a harp with broken 
strings. I am Satan everlasting. 

“T am the inspiration of falsehood, slander, treachery, deceit and mockery, and 
if these elements were to be removed from this world, human society would 
become like a deserted field in which naught would thrive but thorns of virtue. I 
am Satan everlasting. 

“T am the father and mother of sin, and if sin were to vanish, the fighters of sin 
would vanish with it, along with their families and structures. 

“T am the heart of all evil. Would you wish for human motion to stop through 
cessation of my heartbeat? Would you accept the result after destroying the 
cause? I am the cause! Would you allow me to die in this deserted wilderness? 
Do you desire to sever the bond that exists between you and me? Answer me, 
clergyman!” 

And Satan stretched his arms and bent his head forward and gasped deeply; his 
face turned to grey and he resembled one of those Egyptian statues laid waste by 


the ages at the side of the Nile. Then he fixed his glittering eyes upon Father 
Samaan’s face, and said, in a faltering voice, “I am tired and weak. I did wrong 
by using my waning strength to speak on things you already know. Now you 
may do as you please. You may carry me to your home and treat my wounds, or 
leave me in this place to die.” 

Father Samaan quivered and rubbed his hands nervously, and with apology in 
his voice he said, “I know now what I had not known an hour ago. Forgive my 
ignorance. I know that your existence in this world creates temptation, and 
temptation is a measurement by which God adjudges the value of human souls. 
It is a scale which Almighty God uses to weigh the spirits. I am certain that if 
you die, temptation will die, and with its passing, death will destroy the ideal 
power which elevates and alerts man. 

“You must live, for if you die and the people know it, their fear of hell will 
vanish and they will cease worshipping, for naught would be sin. You must live, 
for in your life is the salvation of humanity from vice and sin. 

“As to myself, I shall sacrifice my hatred for you on the altar of my love for 
man.” 

Satan uttered a laugh that rocked the ground, and he said, “What an intelligent 
person you are, Father! And what wonderful knowledge you possess in 
theological facts! You have found, through the power of your knowledge, a 
purpose for my existence which I had never understood, and now we realize our 
need for each other. 

“Come close to me, my brother; darkness is submerging the plains, and half of 
my blood has escaped upon the sand of this valley, and naught remains of me but 
the remnants of a broken body which death shall soon buy unless you render 
aid.” Father Samaan rolled the sleeves of his robe and approached, and lifted 
Satan to his back and walked towards his home. 

In the midst of those valleys, engulfed with silence and embellished with the 
veil of darkness, Father Samaan walked towards the village with his back bent 
under his heavy burden. His black raiment and long beard were spattered with 
blood streaming from above him, but he struggled forward, his lips moving in 
fervent prayer for the life of the dying Satan. 


SPIRITS REBELLIOUS 


Madame Rose Hanie 


Part One 


Miserable is the man who loves a woman and takes her for a wife, pouring at her 
feet the sweat of his skin and the blood of his body and the life of his heart, and 
placing in her hands the fruit of his toil and the revenue of hi s diligence; for 
when he slowly wakes up, he finds that the heart, which he endeavoured to buy, 
is given freely and in sincerity to another man for the enjoyment of its hidden 
secrets and deepest love. Miserable is the woman who arises from the 
inattentiveness and restlessness of youth and finds herself in the home of a man 
showering her with his glittering gold and precious gifts and according her all 
the honours and grace of lavish entertainment but unable to satisfy her soul with 
the heavenly wine which God pours from the eyes of a man into the heart of a 
woman. 

I knew Rashid Bey Namaan since I was a youngster; he was a Lebanese, born 
and reared in the City of Beyrouth. Being a member of an old and rich family 
which preserved the tradition and glory of his ancestry, Rashid was fond of 
citing incidents that dealt mainly with the nobility of his forefathers. In his 
routine life he followed their beliefs and customs which, at that time, prevailed 
in the Middle East. 

Rashid Bey Namaan was generous and good-hearted, but like many of the 
Syrians, looked only at the superficial things instead of reality. He never 
hearkened to the dictates of his heart, but busied himself in obeying the voices of 
his environment. H e amused himself with shimmering objects that blinded his 
eyes and heart to life’s secrets; his soul was diverted away from an 
understanding of the law of nature, and to a temporary self-gratification. He was 
one of those men who hastened to confess their love or disgust to the people, 
then regretted their impulsiveness when it was too late for recall. And then 


shame and ridicule befell them, instead of pardon or sanction. 
These are the characteristics that prompted Rashid Bey Namaan to marry Rose 
Hanie far before her soul embraced his soul in the shadow of the true love that 


makes union a paradise. 
mK OK OK 


After a few years of absence, I returned to the City of Beyrouth. As I went to 
visit Rashid Bey Namaan, I found him pale and thin. On his face one could see 
the spectre of bitter disappointment; his sorrowful eyes bespoke his crushed 
heart and melancholy soul. I was curious to find the cause for his miserable 
plight; however, I did not hesitate to ask for explanation and said, “What became 
of you, Rashid? Where is the radiant smile and the happy countenance that 
accompanied you since childhood? H as death taken away from you a dear 
friend? Or have the black nights stolen from you the gold you have amassed 
during the white days? In the name of friendship, tell me what is causing this 
sadness of heart and weakness of body?” 

He looked at me ruefully, as if I had revived to him some secluded images of 
beautiful days. With a distressed and faltering voice he responded, “When a 
person loses a friend, he consoles himself with the many other friends about him, 
and if he loses his gold, he meditates for a while and casts misfortune from his 
mind, especially when he finds himself healthy and still laden with ambition. But 
when a man loses the ease of his heart, where can he find comfort, and with what 
can he replace it? What mind can master it? When death strikes close by, you 
will suffer. But when the day and the night pass, you will feel the smooth touch 
of the soft fingers of Life; then you will smile and rejoice. 

“Destiny comes suddenly, bringing concern; she stares at you with horrible 
eyes and clutches you at the throat with sharp fingers and hurls you to the 
ground and tramples upon you with ironclad feet; then she laughs and walks 
away, but later regrets her actions and asks you through good fortune to forgive 
her. She stretches her silky hand and lifts you high and sings to you the Song of 
Hope and causes you to lose your cares. She creates in you a new zest for 
confidence and ambition. If your lot in life is a beautiful bird that you love 
dearly, you gladly feed to him the seeds of your inner self, and make your heart 
his cage and your soul his nest. But while you are affectionately admiring him 
and looking upon him with the eyes of love, he escapes from your hands and 
flies very high; then he descends and enters into another cage and never comes 
back to you. What can you do? Where can you find patience and condolence? 


How can you revive your hopes and dreams? What power can still your 
turbulent heart?” 

Having uttered these words with a choking voice and suffering spirit, Rashid 
Bey Namaan stood shaking like a reed between the north and south wind. He 
extended his hands as if to grasp something with his bent fingers and destroy it. 
His wrinkled face was livid, his eyes grew larger as he stared a few moments, 
and it seemed to him as if he saw a demon appearing from non-existence to take 
him away; then he fixed his eyes on mine and his appearance suddenly changed; 
his anger was converted into keen suffering and distress, and he cried out saying, 
“Tt is the woman whom I rescued from between the deathly paws of poverty; I 
opened my coffers to her and made her envied by all women for the beautiful 
raiment and precious gems and magnificent carriages drawn by spirited horses; 
the woman whom my heart has loved and at whose feet I poured affection; the 
woman, to whom I was a true friend, sincere companion and a faithful husband; 
The woman who betrayed me and departed me for another man to share with 
him destitution and partake his evil bread, kneaded with shame and mixed with 
disgrace. The woman I loved; the beautiful bird whom I fed, and to whom I 
made my heart a cage and my soul a nest, has escaped from my hands and 
entered into another cage; that pure an gel, who resided in the paradise of my 
affection and love, now appears to me as a horrible demon, descended into the 
darkness to suffer for her sin and cause me to suffer on earth for her crime.” 

He hid his face with his hands as if wanting to protect himself from himself, 
and became silent for a moment. Then he sighed and said, “This is all I can tell 
you; please do not ask anything further. Do not make a crying voice of my 
calamity, but le t it rather be mute misfortune; perhaps it will grow in silence and 
deaden me away so that I may rest at last with peace.” 

I rose with tears in my eyes and mercy in my heart, and silently bade him 
goodbye; my words had no power to console his wounded heart, and my 
knowledge had no torch to illuminate his gloomy self. 


Part Two 


A few days thereafter I met Madame Rose Hanie for the first time, in a poor 
hovel, surrounded by flowers and trees. She had heard of me through Rashid 
Bey Namaan, the man whose heart she had crushed and stamped upon and left 


under the terrible hoofs of Life. As I looked at her beautiful bright eyes, and 
heard her sincere voice, I said to myself, “Can this be the sordid woman? Can 
this clear face hide an ugly soul and a criminal heart? Is this the unfaithful wife? 
Is this the woman of whom I have spoken evil and imagined as a serpent 
disguised in the form of a beautiful bird?” Then I whispered again to myself 
saying, “Is it this beautiful face that made Rashid Bey Namaan miserable? 
Haven’t we heard that obvious beauty is the cause of many hidden distresses and 
deep suffering? Is not the beautiful moon, that inspires the poets, the same moon 
that angers the silence of the sea with a terrible roar?” 

As we seated ourselves, Madame Rose Hanie seemed to have heard and read 
my thoughts and wanted not to prolong my doubts. She leaned her beautiful head 
upon her hands and with a voice sweeter than the sound of the lyre, she said, “I 
have never met you, but I heard the echoes of your thoughts and dreams from the 
mouths of the people, and they convinced me that you are merciful and have 
understanding for the oppressed woman—the woman whose heart’s secrets you 
have discovered and whose affections you have known. Allow me to reveal to 
you the full contents of my heart so you may know that Rose Hanie never was an 
unfaithful woman. 

“T was scarcely eighteen years of age when fate led me to Rashid Bey 
Namaan, who was then forty years old. He fell in love with me, according to 
what the people say, and took me for a wife and put me in his magnificent home, 
placing at my disposal clothes and precious gems. He exhibited me as a strange 
rarity at the homes of his friends and family; he smiled with triumph when he 
saw his contemporaries looking at me with surprise and admiration; he lifted his 
chin high with pride when he heard the ladies speak of me with praise and 
affection. But never could he hear the whispers, ‘Is this the wife of Rashid Bey 
Namaan, or his adopted daughter?’ And another one commenting, ‘If he had 
married at the proper age, his first born would have been older than Rose Hanie.’ 

“All that happened before my life had awakened from the deep swoon of 
youth, and before God inflamed my heart with the torch of love, and before the 
growth of the seeds of my affections. Yes, all this transpired during the time 
when I believed that real happiness came through beautiful clothes and 
magnificent mansions. When I woke up from the slumber of childhood, I felt the 
flames of sacred fire burning in my heart, and a spiritual hunger gnawing at my 
soul, making it suffer. When I opened my eyes, I found my wings moving to the 
right and left, trying to ascend into the spacious firmament of love, but shivering 
and dropping under the gusts of the shackles of laws that bound my body to a 


man before I knew the true meaning of that law. I felt all these things and knew 
that a woman’s happiness does not come through man’s glory and honour, nor 
through his generosity and affection, but through love that unites both of their 
hearts and affections, making them one member of life’s body and one word 
upon the lips of God. When Truth showed herself to me, I found myself 
imprisoned by law in the mansion of Rashid Bey Namaan, like a thief stealing 
his bread and hiding in the dark and friendly corners of the night. I knew that 
every hour spent with him was a terrible lie written upon my forehead with 
letters of fire before heaven and earth. I could not give him my love and 
affection in reward for his generosity and sincerity. I tried in vain to love him, 
but love is a power that makes our hearts, yet our hearts cannot make that power. 
I prayed and prayed in the silence of the night before God to create in the depths 
of my heart a spiritual attachment that would carry me closer to the man who 
had been chosen for me as a companion through life. 

“My prayers were not granted, because Love descends upon our souls by the 
will of God and not by the demand or the plea of the individual. Thus I remained 
for two years in the home of that man, envying the birds of the field their 
freedom while my friends envied me my painful chains of gold. I was like a 
woman who is torn from her only child; like a lamenting heart, existing without 
attachment; like an innocent victim of the severity of human law. I was close to 
death from spiritual thirst and hunger. 

“One dark day, as I looked behind the heavy skies, I saw a gentle light pouring 
from the eyes of a man who was walking forlornly on the path of life; I closed 
my eyes to that light and said to myself, ‘Oh, my soul, darkness of the grave is 
thy lot, do not be greedy for the light.” Then I heard a beautiful melody from 
heaven that revived my wounded heart with its purity, but I closed my ears and 
said, ‘Oh, my soul, the cry of the abyss is thy lot, do not be greedy for heavenly 
songs.’ I closed my eyes again so I could not see, and shut my ears so I could not 
hear, but my closed eyes still saw that gentle light, and my ears still heard that 
divine sound. I was frightened for the first time and felt like the beggar who 
found a precious jewel near the Emir’s palace and could not pick it up on 
account of fear, or leave it because of poverty. I cried—a cry of a thirsty soul 
who sees a brook surrounded by wild beasts, and falls upon the ground waiting 
and watching fearfully.” 

Then she turned her eyes away from me as if she remembered the past that 
made her ashamed to face me, but she continued, “Those people who go to back 
to eternity before they taste the sweetness of real life are unable to understand 


the meaning of a woman’s suffering. Especially when she devotes her soul to a 
man she loves by the will of God, and her body to another whom she caresses by 
the enforcement of earthly law. It is a tragedy written with the blood of the 
woman’s blood and tears which the man reads with ridicule because he cannot 
understand it; yet, if he does understand, his laughter will turn into scorn and 
blasphemy that act like fire upon her heart. It is a drama enacted by the black 
nights upon the stage of a woman’s soul, whose body is tied up into a man, 
known to her as husband, ere she perceives God’s meaning of marriage. She 
finds her soul hovering about the man whom she adores by all agencies of pure 
and true love and beauty. It is a terrible agony that began with the existence of 
weakness in a woman and the commencement of strength in a man. It will not 
end unless the days of slavery and superiority of the strong over the weak are 
abolished. It is a horrible war between the corrupt law of humanity and the 
sacred affections and holy purpose of the heart. In such a battlefield I was lying 
yesterday, but I gathered the remnants of my strength, and unchained my irons of 
cowardice, and untied my wings from the swaddles of weakness and arose into 
the spacious sky of love and freedom. 

“Today I am one with the man I love; he and I sprang out as one torch from the 
hand of God before the beginning of the world. There is no power under the sun 
that can take my happiness from me, because it emanated from two embraced 
spirits, engulfed by understanding, radiated by Love, and protected by heaven.” 

She looked at me as if she wanted to penetrate my heart with her eyes in order 
to discover the impression of her words upon me, and to hear the echo of her 
voice from within me; but I remained silent and she continued. Her voice was 
full of bitterness of memory and sweetness of sincerity and freedom when she 
said, “The people will tell you that Rose Hanie is an heretic and unfaithful 
woman who followed her desires by leaving the man who elated her into him 
and made her the elegance of his home. They will tell you that she is an 
adulteress and prostitute who destroyed with her filthy hands the wreath of a 
sacred marriage and replaced it with a besmirched union woven of the thorns of 
hell. She took off the garment of virtue and put on the cloak of sin and disgrace. 
They will tell you more than that, because the ghosts of their fathers are still 
living in their bodies. They are like the deserted caves of the mountains that echo 
voices whose meanings are not understood. They neither understand the law of 
God, nor comprehend the true intent of veritable religion, nor distinguish 
between a sinner and an innocent. They look only at the surface of objects 
without knowing their secrets. They pass their verdicts with ignorance, and 


judge with blindness, making the criminal and the innocent, the good and the 
bad, equal. Woe to those who prosecute and judge the people. 

“In God’s eyes I was unfaithful and an adulteress only while at the home of 
Rashid Bey Namaan, because he made me his wife according to the customs and 
traditions and by the force of haste, before heaven had made him mine in 
conformity with the spiritual law of Love and Affection. I was a sinner in the 
eyes of God and myself when I ate his bread and offered him my body in reward 
for his generosity. Now I am pure and clean because the law of Love has freed 
me and made me honourable and faithful. I ceased selling my body for shelter 
and my days for clothes. Yes, I was an adulteress and a criminal when the people 
viewed me as the most honourable and faithful wife; today I am pure and noble 
in spirit, but in their opinion I am polluted, for they judge the soul by the 
outcome of the body and measure the spirit by the standard of matter.” 

Then she looked through the window and pointed out with her right hand 
toward the city as if she had seen the ghost of corruption and the shadow of 
shame among its magnificent buildings. She said pityingly, “Look at those 
majestic mansions and sublime palaces where hypocrisy resides; in those 
edifices and between their beautifully decorated walls resides Treason beside 
Putridity; under the ceiling painted with melted gold lives Falsehood beside 
Pretension. Notice those gorgeous homes that represent happiness, glory and 
domination; they are naught but caverns of misery and distress. They are 
plastered graves in which Treason of the weak woman hides behind her kohled 
eyes and crimsoned lips; in their comers selfishness exists, and the animality of 
man through his gold and silver rules supreme. 

“Tf those high and impregnable buildings scented the door of hatred, deceit and 
corruption, they would have cracked and fallen. The poor villager looks upon 
those residences with tearful eyes, but when he finds that the hearts of the 
occupants are empty of that pure love that exists in the heart of his wife and fills 
its domain, he will smile and go back to his fields contented.” 

And then she took hold of my hand and led me to the side of the window and 
said, “Come, I will show you the unveiled secrets of those people whose path I 
refused to follow. Look at that palace with giant columns. IN it lives a rich man 
who inherited his gold from his father. After having led a life of filth and 
putrefaction, he married a woman about whom he knew nothing except that her 
father was one of the Sultan’s dignitaries. As soon as the wedding trip was over 
he became disgusted and commenced associations with women who sell their 
bodies for pieces of silver. His wife was left alone in that palace like an empty 


bottle left by a drunkard. She cried and suffered for the first time; then she 
realized that her tears were more precious than her degenerate husband. Now she 
is busying herself in the love and devotion of a young man upon whom she 
showers her joyous hours, and into whose heart she pours her sincere love and 
affection. 

“Let me take you now to that gorgeous home surrounded by beautiful gardens. 
It is the home of a man who comes from a noble family which ruled the country 
for many generations, but whose standards, wealth, and prestige have declined 
due to their indulgence in mad spending and slothfulness. A few years ago this 
man married an ugly but rich woman. After he acquired her fortune, he ignored 
her completely and commenced devoting himself to an attractive young woman. 
His wife today is devoting her time to curling her hair, painting her lips and 
perfuming her body. She wears the most expensive clothes and hopes that some 
young man will smile and come to visit her, but it is all in vain, for she cannot 
succeed except in receiving a smile from her ugly self in the mirror. 

“Observe that big manor, encircled with the marble statuary; it is the home of a 
beautiful woman who possesses strange character. When her first husband died, 
she inherited all his money and estate; then she selected a man with a weak mind 
and feeble body and became his wife to protect herself from the evil tongues, 
and to use him as a shield for her abominations. She is now among her admirers 
like a bee that sucks the sweetest and most delicious flowers. 

That beautiful home next to it was built by the greatest architect in the 
province; it belongs to a greedy and substantial man who devotes all of his time 
to amassing gold and grinding the faces of the poor. He has a wife of 
supernatural beauty, bodily and spiritually, but she is like the rest, a victim of 
early marriage. Her father committed a crime by giving her away to a man 
before she attained understanding age, placing on her neck the heavy yoke of 
corrupt marriage. She is thin and pale now, and cannot find an outlet for her 
imprisoned affection. She is sinking slowly and craving for death to free her 
from the mesh of slavery and deliver her from a man who spends his life 
gathering gold and cursing the hour he married a barren woman who could not 
bring him a child to carry on his name and inherit his money. 

In that home among the orchards lives an ideal poet; he married an ignorant 
woman who ridicules his works because she cannot understand them, and laughs 
at his conduct because she cannot adjust herself to his sublime way of life. That 
poet found freedom from despair in his love for a married woman who 
appreciates his intelligence and inspires him by kindling in his heart the torch of 


affections, and revealing to him the most beautiful and eternal sayings by means 
of her charm and beauty.” 

Silence prevailed for a few moments, and Madame Hanie seated herself on a 
sofa by the window as if her soul were tired of roaming those quarters. Then she 
slowly continued, “These are the residences in which I refused to live; these are 
the graves in which I, too, was spiritually buried. These people from whom I 
have freed myself are the ones who become attracted by the body and repelled 
by the spirit, and who know naught of Love and Beauty. The only mediator 
between them and God is God’s pity for their ignorance of the law of God. I 
cannot judge, for I was one of them, but I sympathize with all my heart. I do not 
hate them, but I hate their surrender to weakness and falsehood. I have said all 
these things to show you the reality of the people from whom I have escaped 
against their will. I was trying to explain to you the life of persons who speak 
every evil against me because I have lost their friendship and finally gained my 
own. I emerged from their dark dungeon and directed my eyes towards the light 
where sincerity, truth and justice prevail. They have exiled me now from their 
society and I am pleased, because humanity does not exile except the one whose 
noble spirit rebels against despotism and oppression. He who does not prefer 
exile to slavery is not free by any measure of freedom, truth and duty. 

“Yesterday I was like a tray containing all kinds of palatable foods, and Rashid 
Bey Namaan never approached me unless he felt a need for that food; yet both of 
our souls remained far apart from us like two humble, dignified servants. I have 
tried to reconcile myself to what people call misfortune, but my spirit refused to 
spend all its life kneeling with me before a horrible idol erected by the dark ages 
and called LAW. I kept my chains until I heard Love calling me and saw my 
spirit preparing to embark. Then I broke them and walked out from Rashid Bey 
Namaan’s home like a bird freed from his iron cage and leaving behind me all 
the gems, clothes and servants. I came to live with my beloved, for I knew that 
what I was doing was honest. Heaven does not want me to weep and suffer. 
Many times at night I prayed for dawn to come and when dawn came, I prayed 
for the day to be over. God does not want me to lead a miserable life, for He 
placed in the depths of my heart a desire for happiness; His glory rests in the 
happiness of my heart. 

“This is my story and this is my protest before heaven and earth; this is what I 
sing and repeat while people are closing their ears for fear of hearing me and 
leading their spirits into rebellion that would crumble the foundation of their 
quavering society. 


“This is the rough pathway I have carved until I reached the mountain peak of 
my happiness. Now if death comes to take me away, I will be more than willing 
to offer myself before the Supreme Throne of Heaven without fear or shame. I 
am ready for the day of judgment and my heart is white as the snow. I have 
obeyed the will of God in everything I have done and followed the call of my 
heart while listening to the angelic voice of heaven. This is my drama which the 
people of Beyrouth call ‘A curse upon the lips of life,’ and ‘An ailment in the 
body of society.’ But one day love will arouse their hearts like the sun rays that 
bring forth the flowers even from contaminated earth. One day the wayfarers 
will stop by my grave and greet the earth that enfolds my body and say, ‘Here 
lies Rose Hanie who freed herself from the slavery of decayed human laws in 
order to comply with God’s law of pure love. She turned her face toward the sun 


so she would not see the shadow of her body amongst the skulls and thorns.’” 
mK OK OK 


The door opened and a man entered. His eyes were shining with magic rays and 
upon his lips appeared a wholesome smile. Madame Hanie rose, took the young 
man’s arm and introduced him to me, then gave him my name with flattering 
words. I knew that he was the one for whose sake she denied the whole world 
and violated all earthly laws and customs. 

As we sat down, silence controlled. Each one of us was engrossed in deep 
thought. One minute worthy of silence and respect had passed when I looked at 
the couple sitting side by side. I saw something I had never seen before, and 
realized instantly the meaning of Madame Hanie’s story. I comprehended the 
secret of her protest against the society which persecutes those who rebel against 
confining laws and customs before determining the cause for the rebellion. I saw 
one heavenly spirit before me, composed of two beautiful and united persons, in 
the midst of which stood the god of Love stretching his wings over them to 
protect them from evil tongues. I found a complete understanding emanating 
from two smiling faces, illuminated by sincerity and surrounded by virtue. For 
the first time in my life I found the phantom of happiness standing between a 
man and a woman, cursed by religion and opposed by the law. I rose and bade 
them goodbye and left that poor hovel which Affection had erected as an altar to 
Love and Understanding. I walked past the buildings which Madame Hanie 
pointed out to me. As I reached the end of these quarters I remembered Rashid 
Bey Namaan and meditated his miserable plight and said to myself, “He is 
oppressed; will heaven ever listen to him if he complains about Madame Hanie? 
Had that woman done wrong when she left him and followed the freedom of her 


heart? Or did he commit a crime by subduing her heart into love? Which of the 
two is the oppressed and which is the oppressor? Who is the criminal and who is 
the innocent?” 

Then I resumed talking to myself after a few moments of deep thinking. 
“Many times deception had tempted woman to leave her husband and follow 
wealth, because her love for riches and beautiful raiment blinds her and leads her 
into shame. Was Madame Hanie deceitful when she left her rich husband’s 
palace for a poor man’s hut? Many times ignorance kills a woman’s honour and 
revives her passion; she grows tired and leaves her husband, prompted by her 
desires, and follows a man to whom she lowers herself. Was Madame Hanie an 
ignorant woman following her physical desires when she declared publicly her 
independence and joined her beloved young man? She could have satisfied 
herself secretly while at her husband’s home, for many men were willing to be 
the slaves of her beauty and martyrs of her love. Madame Hanie was a miserable 
woman. She sought only happiness, found it, and embraced it. This is the very 
truth which society disrespects.” Then I whispered through the ether and 
inquired of myself, “Is it permissible for a woman to buy her happiness with her 
husband’s misery?” And my soul added, “Is it lawful for a man to enslave his 


wife’s affection when he realizes he will never possess it?” 
mK OK OK 


I continued walking and Madame Hanie’s voice was still sounding in my ears 
when I reached the extreme end of the city. The sun was disappearing and 
silence ruled the fields and prairies while the birds commenced singing their 
evening prayers. I stood there meditating, and then I sighed and said, “Before the 
throne of Freedom, the trees rejoice with the frolicsome breeze and enjoy the 
rays of the sun and the beams of the moon. Through the ears of Freedom these 
birds whisper and around Freedom they flutter to the music of the brooks. 
Throughout the sky of Freedom these flowers breathe their fragrance and before 
Freedom’s eyes they smile when day comes. 

“Everything lives on earth according to the law of nature, and from that law 
emerges the glory and joy of liberty; but man is denied this fortune, because he 
set for the God-given soul a limited and earthly law of his own. He made for 
himself strict rules. Man built a narrow and painful prison in which he secluded 
his affections and desires. He dug out a deep grave in which he buried his heart 
and its purpose. If an individual, through the dictates of his soul, declares his 
withdrawal from society and violates the law, his fellow-men will say he is a 
rebel worthy of exile, or an infamous creature worthy only of execution. Will 


man remain a slave of self-confinement until the end of the world? Or will he be 
freed by the passing of time and live in the Spirit for the Spirit? Will man insist 
upon staring downward and backward at the earth? Or will he turn his eyes 
toward the sun so he will not see the shadow of his body amongst the skulls and 
thorns?” 


The Cry of the Graves 
(2 — = C) 


Part One 


The Emir walked into the court room and took the central chair while at his right 
and left sat the wise men of the country. The guards, armed with swords and 
spears, stood in attention, and the people who came to witness the trial rose and 
bowed ceremoniously to the Emir whose eyes emanated a power that revealed 
horror to their spirits and fear to their hearts. As the court came to order and the 
hour of judgment approached, the Emir raised his hand and shouted saying, 
“Bring forth the criminals singly and tell me what crimes they have committed.” 
The prison door opened like the mouth of a ferocious yawning beast. In the 
obscure corners of the dungeon one could hear the echo of shackles rattling in 
unison with the moaning and lamentations of the prisoners. The spectators were 
eager to see the prey of Death emerging from the depths of that inferno. A few 
moments later, two soldiers came out leading a young man with his arms 
pinioned behind his back. His stern face bespoke nobility of spirit and strength 
of the heart. He was halted in the middle of the court room and the soldiers 
marched a few steps to the rear. The Emir stared at him steadily and said, “What 
crime has this man, who is proudly and triumphantly standing before me, 
committed?” One of the courtmen responded, “He is a murderer; yesterday he 
slew one of the Emir’s officers who was on an important mission in the 
surrounding villages; he was still grasping the bloody sword when he was 
arrested.” The Emir retorted with anger, “Return the man to the dark prison and 
tie him with heavy chains, and at dawn cut off his head with his own sword and 
throw his body in the woods so that the beasts may eat the flesh, and the air may 
carry its remindful door into the noses of his family and friends.” The youth was 
returned to prison while the people looked upon him with sorrowful eyes, for he 
was a young man in the spring of life. 


The soldiers returned back again from the prison leading a young woman of 
natural and frail beauty. She looked pale and upon her face appeared the signs of 
oppression and disappointment. Her eyes were soaked with tears and her head 
was bent under the burden of grief. After eyeing her thoroughly, the Emir 
exclaimed, “And this emaciated woman, who is standing before me like the 
shadow beside a corpse, what has she done?” One of the soldiers answered him, 
saying, “She is an adulteress; last night her husband discovered her in the arms 
of another. After her lover escaped, her husband turned her over to the law.” The 
Emir looked at her while she raised her face without expression, and he ordered, 
“Take her back to the dark room and stretch her upon a bed of thorns so she may 
remember the resting place which she polluted with her fault; give her vinegar 
mixed with gall to drink so she may remember the taste of those sweet kisses. At 
dawn drag her naked body outside the city and stone her. Let the wolves enjoy 
the tender meat of her body and the worms pierce her bones.” AS she walked 
back to the dark cell, the people looked upon her with sympathy and surprise. 
They were astonished with the Emir’s justice and grieved over her fate. The 
soldiers reappeared, bringing with them a sad man with shaking knees and 
trembling like a tender sapling before the north wind. He looked powerless, 
sickly and frightened, and he was miserable and poor. The Emir stared at him 
loathfully and inquired, “And this filthy man, who is like dead amongst the 
living; what has he done?” One of the guards returned, “He is a thief who broke 
into the monastery and stole the sacred vases which the priests found under his 
garment when they arrested him.” 

As a hungry eagle who looks at a bird with broken wings, the Emir looked at 
him and said, “Take him back to the jail and chain him, and at dawn drag him 
into a lofty tree and hang him between heaven and earth so his sinful hands may 
perish and the members of his body may be turned into particles and scattered by 
the wind.” As the thief stumbled back into the depths of the prison, the people 
commenced whispering one to another saying, “How dare such a weak and 
heretic man steal the sacred vases of the monastery?” 

At this time the court adjourned and the Emir walked out accompanied by all 
his wise men, guarded by the soldiers, while the audience scattered and the place 
became empty except of the moaning and wailing of the prisoners. All this 
happened while I was standing there like a mirror before passing ghosts. I was 
meditating the laws, made by man for man, contemplating what the people call 
“justice,” and engrossing myself with deep thoughts of the secrets of life. I tried 
to understand the meaning of the universe. I was dumbfounded in finding myself 


lost like a horizon that disappears beyond the cloud. As I left the place I said to 
myself, “The vegetable feeds upon the elements of the earth, the sheep eats the 
vegetable, the wolf preys upon the sheep, and the bull kills the wolf while the 
lion devours the bull; yet Death claims the lion. Is there any power that will 
overcome Death and make these brutalities an eternal justice? Is there a force 
that can convert all the ugly things into beautiful objects? Is there any might that 
can clutch with its hands all the elements of life and embrace them with joy as 
the sea joyfully engulfs all the brooks into its depths? Is there any power that can 
arrest the murdered and the murderer, the adulteress and the adulterer, the robber 
and the robbed, and bring them to a court loftier and more supreme than the 
court of the Emir?” 


Part Two 


The next day I left the city for the fields where silence reveals to the soul that 
which the spirit desires, and where the pure sky kills the germs of despair, nursed 
in the city by the narrow streets and obscured places. When I reached the valley, 
I saw a flock of crows and vultures soaring and descending, filling the sky with 
cawing, whistling and rustling of the wings. As I proceeded I saw before me a 
corpse of a man hanged high in a tree, the body of a dead naked woman in the 
midst of a heap of stones, and a carcass of a youth with his head cut off and 
soaked with blood mixed with earth. It was a horrible sight that blinded my eyes 
with a thick, dark veil of sorrows. I looked in every direction and saw naught 
except the spectre of Death standing by those ghastly remains. Nothing could be 
heard except the wailing of non-existence, mingled with the cawing of crows 
hovering about the victims of human laws. Three human beings, who yesterday 
were in the lap of Life, today fell as victims to Death because they broke the 
rules of human society. When a man kills another man, the people say he is a 
murderer, but when the Emir kills him, the Emir is just. When a man robs a 
monastery, they say he is a thief, but when the Emir robs him of his life, the 
Emir is honourable. When a woman betrays her husband, they say she is an 
adulteress, but when the Emir makes her walk naked in the streets and stones her 
later, the Emir is noble. Shedding of blood is forbidden, but who made it lawful 
for the Emir? Stealing one’s money is a crime, but taking away one’s life is a 
noble act. Betrayal of a husband may be an ugly deed, but stoning of living souls 


is a beautiful sight. Shall we meet evil with evil and say this is the Law? Shall 
we fight corruption with greater corruption and say this is the Rule? Shall we 
conquer crimes with more crimes and say this is Justice? Had not the Emir killed 
an enemy in his past life? Had he not robbed his weak subjects of money and 
property? Had he not committed adultery? Was he infallible when he killed the 
murderer and hanged the thief in the tree? Who are those who hanged the thief in 
the tree? Are they angels descended from heaven, or men looting and usurping? 
Who cut off the murderer’s head? Are they divine prophets, or soldiers shedding 
blood wherever they go? Who stoned that adulteress? Were they virtuous hermits 
who came from their monasteries, or humans who loved to commit atrocities 
with glee, under the protection of ignorant Law? What is Law? Who saw it 
coming with the sun from the depths of heaven? What human saw the heart of 
God and found its will or purpose? In what century did the angels walk among 
the people and preach to them, saying, “Forbid the weak from enjoying life, and 
kill the outlaws with the sharp edge of the sword, and step upon the sinners with 
iron feet?” 

As my mind suffered in this fashion, I heard a rustling of feet in the grass close 
by. I took heed and saw a young woman coming from behind the trees; she 
looked carefully in every direction before she approached the three carcasses 
that were there. As she glanced, she saw the youth’s head that was cut off. She 
cried fearfully, knelt, and embraced it with her trembling arms; then she 
commenced shedding tears and touching the blood-matted, curly hair with her 
soft fingers, crying in a voice that came from the remnants of a shattered heart. 
She could bear the sight no longer. She dragged the body to a ditch and placed 
the head gently between the shoulders, covered the entire body with earth, and 
upon the grave she planted the sword with which the head of the young man had 
been cut off. 

As she started to leave, I walked toward her. She trembled when she saw me, 
and her eyes were heavy with tears. She sighed and said, “Turn me over to the 
Emir if you wish. It is better for me to die and follow the one who saved my life 
from the grip of disgrace than to leave his corpse as food for the ferocious 
beasts.” Then I responded, “Fear me not, poor girl, I have lamented the young 
man before you did. But tell me, how did he save you from the grip of 
disgrace?” She replied with a choking and fainting voice, “One of the Emir’s 
officers came to our farm to collect the tax; when he saw me, he looked upon me 
as a wolf looks upon a lamb. He imposed on my father a heavy tax that even a 
rich man could not pay. He arrested me as a token to take to the Emir in ransom 


for the gold which my father was unable to give. I begged him to spare me, but 
he took no heed, for he had no mercy. Then I cried for help, and this young man, 
who is dead now, came for my help and saved me from a living death. The 
officer attempted to kill him, but this man took an old sword that was hanging on 
the wall of our home and stabbed him. He did not run away like a criminal, but 
stood by the dead officer until the law came and took him into custody.” Having 
uttered these words which would make any human heart bleed with sorrow, she 
turned her face and walked away. 

In a few moments I saw a youth coming and hiding his face with a cloak. As 
he approached the corpse of the adulteress, he took off the garment and placed it 
upon her naked body. Then he drew a dagger from under the cloak and dug a pit 
in which he placed the dead girl with tenderness and care, and covered her with 
earth upon which he poured his tears. When he finished his task, he plucked 
some flowers and placed them reverently upon the grave. As he started to leave, 
I halted him saying, “What kin are you to this adulteress? And what prompted 
you to endanger your life by coming here to protect her naked body from the 
ferocious beasts?” 

When he stared at me, his sorrowful eyes bespoke his misery, and he said, “I 
am the unfortunate man for whose love she was stoned; I loved her and she 
loved me since childhood; we grew together; Love, whom we served and 
revered, was the lord of our hearts. Love joined both of us and embraced our 
souls. One day I absented myself from the city, and upon my return I discovered 
that her father obliged her to marry a man she did not love. My life became a 
perpetual struggle, and all my days were converted into one long and dark night. 
I tried to be at peace with my heart, but my heart would not be still. Finally I 
went to see her secretly and my sole purpose was to have a glimpse of her 
beautiful eyes and hear the sound of her serene voice. When I reached her house 
I found her lonely, lamenting her unfortunate self. I sat by her; silence was our 
important conversation and virtue our companion. One hour of understanding 
quiet passed, when her husband entered. I cautioned him to contain himself but 
he dragged her with both hands into the street and cried out saying, ‘Come, come 
and see the adulteress and her lover!’ All the neighbours rushed about and later 
the law came and took her to the Emir, but I was not touched by the soldiers. The 
ignorant Law and sodden customs punished the woman for her father’s fault and 
pardoned the man.” 

Having thus spoken, the man turned toward the city while I remained 
pondering the corpse of the thief hanging in that lofty tree and moving slightly 


every time the wind shook the branches, waiting for someone to bring him down 
and stretch him upon the bosom of the earth beside the Defender of Honour and 
Martyr of Love. An hour later, a frail and wretched woman appeared, crying. 
She stood before the hanged man and prayed reverently. Then she struggled up 
into the tree and gnawed with her teeth on the linen rope until it broke and the 
dead fell on the ground like a huge wet cloth; whereupon she came down, dug a 
grave, and buried the thief by the side of the other two victims. After covering 
him with earth, she took two pieces of wood and fashioned a cross and placed it 
over the head. When she turned her face to the city and started to depart, I 
stopped her saying, “What incited you to come and bury this thief?” She looked 
at me miserably and said, “He is my faithful husband and merciful companion; 
he is the father of my children—five young ones starving to death; the oldest is 
eight years of age, and the youngest is still nursing. My husband was not a thief, 
but a farmer working in the monastery’s land, making our living on what little 
food the priests and monks gave him when he returned home at eventide. He had 
been farming for them since he was young, and when he became weak, they 
dismissed him, advising him to go back home and send his children to take his 
place as soon as they grew older. He begged them in the name of Jesus and the 
angels of heaven to let him stay, but they took no heed of his plea. They had no 
mercy on him nor on his starving children who were helplessly crying for food. 
He went to the city seeking employment, but in vain, for the rich did not employ 
except the strong and the healthy. Then he sat on the dusty street stretching his 
hand toward all who passed, begging and repeating the sad song of his defeat in 
life, while suffering from hunger and humiliation, but the people refused to help 
him, saying that lazy people did not deserve alms. On night, hunger gnawed 
painfully at our children. especially the youngest, who tried hopelessly to nurse 
on my dry breast. My husband’s expression changed and he left the house under 
the cover of the night. He entered the monastery’s bin and carried out a bushel of 
wheat. As he emerged, the monks woke up from their slumber and arrested him 
after beating him mercilessly. At dawn they brought him to the Emir and 
complained that he came to the monastery to steal the golden vases of the altar. 
He was placed in prison and hanged the second day. He was trying to fill the 
stomachs of his little hungry one with the wheat he had raised by his own labour, 
but the Emir killed him and used his flesh as food to fill the stomachs of the 
birds and the beasts.” Having spoken in this manner, she left me alone in a 
sorrowful plight and departed. 


ok OOK OK 


I stood there before the graves like a speaker suffering wordlessness while trying 
to recite a eulogy. I was speechless, but my falling tears substitute for my words 
and spoke for my soul. My spirit rebelled when I attempted to meditate a while, 
because the soul is like a flower that folds its petals when dark comes, and 
breathes not its fragrance into the phantoms of the night. I felt as if the earth that 
enfolded the victims of oppression in that lonely place were filling my ears with 
sorrowful tunes of suffering souls, and inspiring me to talk. I resorted to silence, 
but if the people understood what silence reveals to them, they would have been 
as close to God as the flowers of the valleys. If the flames of my sighing soul 
had touched the trees, they would have moved from their places and marched 
like a strong army to fight the Emir with their branches and tear down the 
monastery upon the heads of those priests and monks. I stood there watching, 
and felt that the sweet feeling of mercy and the bitterness of sorrow were 
pouring from my heart upon the newly dug graves—a grave of a young man who 
sacrificed his life in defending a weak maiden, whose life and honour he had 
saved from between the paws and teeth of a savage human; a youth whose head 
was cut off in reward for his bravery; and his sword was planted upon his grave 
by the one he saved, as a symbol of heroism before the face of the sun that 
shines upon an empire laden with stupidity and corruption. A grave of a young 
woman whose heart was inflamed with love before her body was taken by greed, 
usurped by lust, and stoned by tyranny... She kept her faith until death; her lover 
placed flowers upon her grave to speak through their withering hours of those 
souls whom Love had selected and blessed among a people blinded by earthly 
substance and muted by ignorance. A grave of a miserable man, weakened by 
hard labour in the monastery’s land, who asked for bread to feed his hungry little 
ones, and was refused. He resorted to begging, but the people took no heed. 
When his soul led him to restore a small part of the crop which he had raised and 
gathered, he was arrested and beaten to death. His poor widow erected a cross 
upon his head as a witness in the silence of the night before the stars of heaven 
to testify against those priests who converted the kind teaching of Christ into 
sharp swords by which they cut the people’s necks and tore the bodies of the 
weak. 

The sun disappeared behind the horizon as if tiring of the world’s troubles and 
loathing the people’s submission. At that moment the evening began to weave a 
delicate veil from the sinews of silence and spread it upon Nature’s body. I 
stretched my hand toward the graves, pointing at their symbols, lifted my eyes 
toward heaven and cried out, “Oh, Bravery, this is your sword, buried now in the 


earth! Oh, Love, these are your flowers, scorched by fire! Oh, Lord Jesus, this is 
Thy cross, submerged in the obscurity of the night!” 


Khalil the Heretic 


Part One 


Sheik Abbas was looked upon as a prince by the people of a solitary village in 
North Lebanon. His mansion stood in the midst of those poor villagers’ huts like 
a healthy giant amidst the sickly dwarfs. He lived amid luxury while they 
pursued an existence of penury. They obeyed him and bowed reverently before 
him as he spoke to them. It seemed as though the power of mind had appointed 
him its official interpreter and spokesman. His anger would make them tremble 
and scatter like autumn leaves before a strong wind. If he were to slap one’s 
face, it would be heresy on the individual’s part to move or lift his head or make 
any attempt to discover why the blow had come. If he smiled at a man, the 
villagers would consider the person thus honoured as the most fortunate. The 
people’s fear and surrender to Sheik Abbas were not due to weakness; however, 
their poverty and need of him had brought about this state of continual 
humiliation. Even the huts they lived in and the fields they cultivated were 
owned by Sheik Abbas who had inherited them from his ancestors. 

The farming of the land and the sowing of the seeds and the gathering of 
wheat were all done under the supervision of the Sheik who, in reward for their 
toil, compensated them with a small portion of the crop which barely kept them 
from falling as victims of gnawing starvation. 

Often many of them were in need of bread before the crop was reaped, and 
they came to Sheik Abbas and asked him with pouring tears to advance them a 
few piastres or a bushel of wheat and the Sheik gladly granted their request for 
he knew that they would pay their debts doubly when harvest time came. Thus 
those people remained obligated all their lives, left a legacy of debts to their 
children and were submissive to their master whose anger they had always 
feared and whose friendship and good will they had constantly but 


unsuccessfully endeavoured to win. 


Part Two 


Winter came and brought heavy snow and strong winds; the valleys and the 
fields became empty of all things except leafless trees which stood as spectres of 
death above the lifeless plains. 

Having stored the products of the land in the Sheik’s bins and filled his vases 
with the wine of the vineyards, the villagers retreated to their huts to spend a 
portion of their lives idling by the fireside and commemorating the glory of the 
past ages and relating to one another the tales of weary days and long nights. 

The old year had just breathed its last into the grey sky. The night had arrived 
during which the New Year would be crowned and placed upon the throne of the 
Universe. The snow began to fall heavily and the whistling winds were racing 
from the lofty mountains down to the abyss and blowing the snow into heaps to 
be stored away in the valleys. 

The trees were shaking under the heavy storms and the fields and knolls were 
covered with a white floor upon which Death was writing vague lines and 
effacing them. The mists stood as partitions between the scattered villages by the 
sides of the valleys. The lights that flickered through the windows of those 
wretched huts disappeared behind the thick veil of Nature’s wrath. 

Fear penetrated the fellahin’s hearts and the animals stood by their mangers in 
the sheds, while the dogs were hiding in the corners. One could hear the voices 
of the screaming winds and thundering of the storms resounding from the depths 
of the valleys. It seemed as if Nature were enraged by the passing of the old year 
and trying to wrest revenge from those peaceful souls by fighting with weapons 
of cold and frost. 

That night under the raging sky, a young man was attempting to walk the 
winding trail that connected Deir Kizhaya with Sheik Abbas’ village. The 
youth’s limbs were numbed with cold, while pain and hunger usurped him of his 
strength. The black raiment he wore was bleached with the falling snow, as if he 
were shrouded in death before the hour of his death had come. He was struggling 
against the wind. His progress was difficult, and he took but a few steps forward 
with each effort. He called for help and then stood silent, shivering in the cold 


night. He had slim hope, withering between great despair and deep sorrow. He 
was like a bird with a broken wing, who fell in a stream whose whirlpools 
carried him down to the depths. 

The young man continued walking and falling until his blood stopped 
circulating and he collapsed. He uttered a terrible sound... the voice of a soul 
who encountered the hollow face of Death... a voice of dying youth, weakened 
by man and trapped by nature... a voice of the love of existence in the space of 
nothingness. 


Part Three 


On the north side of that village, in the midst of the wind-torn fields, stood the 
solitary home of a woman named Rachel, and her daughter Miriam who had not 
then attained the age of eighteen. Rachel was the widow of Samaan Ramy, who 
was found slain six years earlier, but the law of man did not find the murderer. 

Like the rest of the Lebanese widows, Rachel sustained life through long, hard 
work. During the harvest season, she would look for ears of corn left behind by 
others in the field, and in Autumn she gathered the remnants of some forgotten 
fruits in the gardens. In Winter she spun wool and made raiment for which she 
received a few piastres or a bushel of grain. Miriam, her daughter, was a 
beautiful girl who shared with her mother the burden of toil. 

That bitter night the two women were sitting by the fireplace whose warmth 
was weakened by the frost and whose firebrands were buried beneath the ashes. 
By their side was a flickering lamp that sent its yellow, dimmed rays into the 
heart of darkness like a prayer that sends phantoms of hope into the hearts of the 
sorrowful. 

Midnight had come and they were listening to the wailing winds outside. 
Every now and then Miriam would get up, open the small transom and look 
toward the obscured sky, and then she would return to her chair worried and 
frightened by the raging elements. Suddenly Miriam started, as if she had 
awakened from a swoon of deep slumber. She looked anxiously toward her 
mother and said, “Did you hear that, Mother? Did you hear a voice calling for 
help?” The mother listened a moment and said, “I hear nothing but the crying 
wind, my daughter.” Then Miriam exclaimed, “I heard a voice deeper than the 
thundering heaven and more sorrowful than the wailing of the tempest.” 


Having uttered these words. she stood up and opened the door and listened for 
a moment. Then she said, “I hear it again, Mother!” Rachel hurried toward the 
frail door and after a moment’s hesitation she said, “And I hear it, too. Let us go 
and see.” 

She wrapped herself with a long robe, opened the door and walked out 
cautiously, while Miriam stood at the door, the wind blowing her long hair. 

Having forced her way a short distance through the snow, Rachel stopped and 
shouted out, “Who is calling... where are you?” There was no answer; then she 
repeated the same words again and again, but she heard naught except thunder. 
Then she courageously advanced forward, looking in every direction. She had 
walked for some time, when she found some deep footprints upon the snow; she 
followed them fearfully and in a few moments found a human body lying before 
her on the snow, like a patch on a white dress. As she approached him and 
leaned his head over her knees, she felt his pulse that bespoke his slowing heart 
beats and his slim chance in life. She turned her face toward the hut and called, 
“Come, Miriam, come and help me, I have found him!” Miriam rushed out and 
followed her mother’s footprints, while shivering with cold and trembling with 
fear. As she reached the place and saw the youth lying motionless, she cried with 
an aching voice. The mother put her hands under his armpits, calmed Miriam 
and said, “Fear not, for he is still living; hold the lower edge of his cloak and let 
us carry him home.” 

Confronted with the strong wind and heavy snow, the two women carried the 
youth and started toward the hut. As they reached the little haven, they laid him 
down by the fireplace. Rachel commenced rubbing his numbed hands and 
Miriam drying his hair with the end of her dress. The youth began to move after 
a few minutes. His eyelids quivered and he took a deep sigh—a sigh that brought 
the hope of his safety into the hearts of the merciful women. They removed his 
shoes and took off his black robe. Miriam looked at her mother and said, 
“Observe his raiment, Mother; these clothes are worn by the monks.” After 
feeding the fire with a bundle of dry sticks, Rachel looked at her daughter with 
perplexity and said, “The monks do not leave their convent on such a terrible 
night.” And Miriam inquired, “But he has no hair on his face; the monks wear 
beards.” The mother gazed at him with eyes full of mercy and maternal love; 
then she turned to her daughter and said, “It makes no difference whether he is a 
monk or a criminal; dry his feet well, my daughter.” Rachel opened a closet, 
took from it a jar of wine and poured some in an earthenware bowl. Miriam held 
his head while the mother gave him some of it to stimulate his heart. As he 


sipped the wine he opened his eyes for the first time and gave his rescuers a 
sorrowful look mingled with tears of gratitude—the look of a human who felt 
the smooth touch of life after having been gripped in the sharp claws of death—a 
look of great hope after hope had died. Then he bent his head, and his lips 
trembled when he uttered the words, “May God bless both of you.” Rachel 
placed her hand upon his shoulder and said, “Be calm, brother. Do not tire 
yourself with talking until you gain strength.” And Miriam added, “Rest your 
head on this pillow, brother, and we will place you closer to the fire.” Rachel 
refilled the bowl with wine and gave it to him. She looked at her daughter and 
said, “Hang his robe by the fire so it will dry.” Having executed her mother’s 
command, she returned and commenced looking at him mercifully, as if she 
wanted to help him by pouring into his heart all the warmth of her soul. Rachel 
brought two loaves of bread with some preserves and dry fruits; she sat by him 
and began to feed him small morsels, as a mother feeds her little child. At this 
time he felt stronger and sat up on the hearth mat while the red flames of fire 
reflected upon his sad face. His eyes brightened and he shook his head slowly, 
saying, “Mercy and cruelty are both wrestling in the human heart like the mad 
elements in the sky of this terrible night, but mercy shall overcome cruelty 
because it is divine, and the terror alone, of this night, shall pass away when 
daylight comes.” Silence prevailed for a minute and then he added with a 
whispering voice, “A human hand drove me into desperation and a human hand 
rescued me; how severe man is, and how merciful man is!” And Rachel 
inquired, “How ventured you, brother, to leave the convent on such a terrible 
night, when even the beasts do not venture forth?” 

The youth shut his eyes as if he wanted to restore his tears back into the depths 
of his heart, whence they came, and he said, “The animals have their caves, and 
the birds of the sky their nests, but the son of man has not place to rest his head.” 
Rachel retorted, “That is what Jesus said about himself.” And the young man 
resumed, “This is the answer for every man who wants to follow the Spirit and 
the Truth in this age of falsehood, hypocrisy and corruption.” 

After a few moments of contemplation, Rachel said, “But there are many 
comfortable rooms in the convent, and the coffers are full of gold, and all kinds 
of provisions. The sheds of the convent are stocked with fat calves and sheep; 
what made you leave such haven in this deathly night?” The youth sighed deeply 
and said, “I left that place because I hated it.” And Rachel rejoined, “A monk in 
a convent is like a soldier in the battlefield who is required to obey the orders of 
his leader regardless of their nature. I heard that a man could not become a monk 


unless he did away with his will, his thoughts, his desires, and all that pertains to 
the mind. But a good priest does not ask his monks to do unreasonable things. 
How could the head priest of Deir Kizhaya ask you to give up your life to the 
storms and snow?” And he remarked, “In the opinion of the head priest, a man 
cannot become a monk unless he is blind and ignorant, senseless and dumb. I left 
the convent because I am a sensible man who can see, feel, and hear.” 

Miriam and Rachel stared at him as if they had found in his face a hidden 
secret; after a moment of meditation the mother said, “Will a man who sees and 
hears go out on a night that blinds the eyes and deafens the ears?” And the youth 
sated quietly, “I was expelled from the convent.” “Expelled!” exclaimed Rachel; 
and Miriam repeated the same word in unison with her mother. 

He lifted his head, regretting his words, for he was afraid lest their love and 
sympathy be converted into hatred and disrespect; but when he looked at them 
and found the rays of mercy still emanating from their eyes, and their bodies 
vibrating with anxiety to learn further, his voice choked and he continued, “Yes, 
I was expelled from the convent because I could not dig my grave with my own 
hands, and my heart grew weary of lying and pilfering. I was expelled from the 
convent because my soul refused to enjoy the bounty of a people who 
surrendered themselves to ignorance. I was driven away because I could not find 
rest in the comfortable rooms, built with the money of the poor fellahin. My 
stomach could not hold bread baked with the tears of the orphans. My lips could 
not utter prayers sold for gold and food by the heads to the simple and faithful 
people. I was expelled from the convent like a filthy leper because I was 
repeating to the monks the rules that qualified them to their present position.” 

Silence prevailed while Rachel and Miriam were contemplating his words and 
gazing at him, when they asked, “Are your father and mother living?” And he 
responded, “I have no father or mother now a place that is my home.” Rachel 
drew a deep sigh and Miriam tumed her face toward the wall to hide her 
merciful and loving tears. 

As a withering flower is brought back to life by dew drops that dawn pours 
into its begging petals, so the youth’s anxious heart was enlivened by his 
benefactor’s affection and kindness. He looked at them as a soldier looks upon 
his liberators who rescue him from the grip of the enemy, and he resumed, “I lost 
my parents before I reached the age of seven. The village priest took me to Deir 
Kizhaya and left me at the disposal of the monks who were happy to take me in 
and put me in charge of the cows and sheep, which I led each day to the pasture. 
When I attained the age of fifteen, they put on me this black robe and led me into 


the altar whereupon the head priest addressed me saying, ‘Swear by the name of 
God and all saints, and make a vow to live a virtuous life of poverty and 
obedience.’ I repeated the words before I realized their significance or 
comprehended his own interpretation of poverty, virtue and obedience. 

“My name was Khalil, and since that time the monks addressed me as Brother 
Mobarak, but they never did treat me as a brother. They ate the most palatable 
foods and drank the finest wine, while I lived on dry vegetables and water, 
mixed with tears. They slumbered in soft beds while I slept on a stone slab in a 
dark and cold room by the shed. Oftentimes I asked myself, ‘When will my heart 
stop craving for the food they eat and the wine they eat? When will I cease to 
tremble with fear before my superiors?’ But all my hopes were in vain, for I was 
kept in the same state; and in addition to caring for the cattle, I was obliged to 
move heavy stones on my shoulders and to dig pits and ditches. I sustained life 
on a few morsels of bread given to me in reward for my toil. I knew of no other 
place to which I might go, and the clergymen at the convent had caused me to 
abhor everything they were doing. They had poisoned my mind until I 
commenced to think that the whole world was an ocean of sorrows and miseries 
and that the convent was the only port of salvation. But when I discovered the 
source of their food and gold, I was happy that I did not share it.” 

Khalil straightened himself and looked about with wonder, as if he had found 
something beautiful standing before him in that wretched hut. Rachel and 
Miriam remained silent and he proceeded, “God, who took my father and exiled 
me as an orphan to the convent, did not want me to spend all my life walking 
blindly toward a dangerous jungle; nor did He wish me to be a miserable slave 
for the rest of my life. God opened my eyes and ears and showed me the bright 
light and made me hear Truth when Truth was talking.” 

Rachel thought aloud, “Is there any light, other than the sun, that shines over 
all the people? Are human beings capable of understanding the Truth?” Khalil 
returned, “The true light is that which emanates from within man, and reveals 
the secrets of the heart to the soul, making it happy and contented with life. 
Truth is like the stars; it does not appear except from behind obscurity of the 
night. Truth is like all beautiful things in the world; it does not disclose its 
desirability except to those who first feel the influence of falsehood. Truth is a 
deep kindness that teaches us to be content in our everyday life and share with 
the people the same happiness.” 

Rachel rejoined, “Many are those who live according to their goodness, and 
many are those who believe that compassion to others is the shadow of the law 


of God to man; but still, they do not rejoice in life, for they remain miserable 
until death.” Khalil replied, “Vain are the beliefs and teachings that make man 
miserable, and false is the goodness that leads him into sorrow and despair, for it 
is man’s purpose to be happy on this earth and lead the way to felicity and 
preach its gospel wherever he goes. He who does not see the kingdom of heaven 
in this life will never see it in the coming life. We came not into this life by exile, 
but we came as innocent creatures of God, to learn how to worship the holy and 
eternal spirit and seek the hidden secrets within ourselves from the beauty of life. 
This is the truth which I have learned from the teachings of the Nazarene. This is 
the light that came from within me and showed me the dark corners of the 
convent that threatened my life. This is the deep secret which the beautiful 
valleys and fields revealed to me when I was hungry, sitting lonely and weeping 
under the shadow of the trees. 

“This is the religion as the convent should impart it; as God wished it; as Jesus 
taught it. One day, as my soul became intoxicated with the heavenly intoxication 
of Truth’s beauty, I stood bravely before the monks who were gathering in the 
garden, and criticized their wrong deeds saying, ‘Why do you spend your days 
here and enjoy the bounty of the poor, whose bread you eat was made with the 
sweat of their bodies and the tears of their hearts? Why are you living in the 
shadow of parasitism, segregating yourselves from the people who are in need of 
knowledge? Why are you depriving the country your help? Jesus has sent you as 
lambs amongst the wolves; what has made you as wolves amongst the lambs? 
Why are you fleeing from mankind and from God who created you? If you are 
better than the people who walk in the procession of life, you should go to them 
and better their lives; but if you think they are better than you, you should desire 
to learn from them. How do you take an oath and vow to live in poverty, then 
forget what you have said and live in luxury? How do you swear an obedience to 
God and then revolt against all that religion means? How do you adopt virtue as 
your rule when your hearts are full of lusts? You pretend that you are killing 
your bodies, but in fact you are killing your souls. You feign to abhor the earthly 
things, but your hearts are swollen with greed. You have the people believe in 
you as religious teachers; truly speaking you are like busy cattle who divert 
themselves from knowledge by grazing in a green and beautiful pasture. Let us 
restore to the needy the vast land of the convent and give back to them the silver 
and gold we took from them. Let us disperse from our aloofness and serve the 
weak who made us strong, and cleanse the country in which we live. Let us 
teach this miserable nation to smile and rejoice with heaven’s bounty and glory 


of life and freedom. 

“The people’s tears are more beautiful and God-joined than the ease and 
tranquillity to which you have accustomed yourselves in this place. The 
sympathy that touches the neighbour’s heart is more supreme than the hidden 
virtue in the unseen corners of the convent. A word of compassion to the weak 
criminal or prostitute is nobler than the long prayer which we repeat emptily 
every day in the temple.’” 

At this time Khalil took a deep breath. Then he lifted his eyes toward Rachel 
and Miriam saying, “I was saying all of these things to the monks and they were 
listening with an air of perplexity, as if they could not believe that a young man 
would dare stand before them and utter such bold words. When I finished, one of 
the monks approached me and angrily said to me, ‘How dare you talk in such 
fashion in our presence?’ And another one came laughing and added, ‘Did you 
learn all this from the cows and pigs you tended in the fields?’ And a third one 
stood up and threatened me saying, ‘You shall be punished, heretic!’ Then they 
dispersed as though running away from a leper. Some of them complained to the 
head priest who summoned me before him at eventide. The monks took delight 
in anticipation of my suffering, and there was glee on their faces when I was 
ordered to be scourged and put into prison for forty days and nights. They lad me 
into the dark cell where I spent the time lying on that grave without seeing the 
light. I could not tell the end of the night from the beginning of the day, and 
could feel nothing but crawling insects and the earth under me. I could hear 
naught save the tramping of their feet when my morsel of bread and dish of 
water mixed with vinegar were brought to me at great intervals. 

“When I came out of the prison I was weak and frail, and the monks believed 
that they had cured me of thinking and that they had killed my soul’s desire. 
They thought that hunger and thirst had choked the kindness which God placed 
in my heart. In my forty days of solitude I endeavoured to find a method by 
which I could help these monks to see the light and hear the true song of life, but 
all of my ponderings were in vain, for the thick veil which the long ages had 
woven around their eyes could not be torn away in a short time; and the mortar 
with which ignorance had cemented their ears was hardened and could not be 
removed by the touch of soft fingers.” 

Silence prevailed for a moment, and then Miriam looked at her mother as if 
asking permission to speak. She said, “You must have talked to the monks again, 
if they selected this terrible night in which to banish you from the convent. They 
should learn to be kind even to their enemies.” 


Khalil returned, “This evening, as the thunder storms and warring elements 
raged in the sky, I withdrew myself from the monks who were crouching about 
the fire, telling tales and humorous stories. When they saw me alone they 
commenced to place their wit at my expense. I was reading my Gospel and 
contemplating the beautiful sayings of Jesus that made me forget for the time the 
enraged nature and belligerent elements of the sky, when they approached me 
with a new spirit of ridicule. I ignored them by occupying myself and looking 
through the window, but they became furious because my silence dried the 
laughter of their hearts and the taunting of their lips. One of them said, ‘What are 
you reading, Great Reformer?’ In response to his inquiry, I opened my book and 
read aloud the following passage, ‘But when he saw many of the Pharisees and 
Saducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, ‘O generation of vipers, who 
hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits for 
repentance; And think not to say within yourselves, ‘We have Abraham to our 
father;’ for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise the children 
unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees; therefore 
every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the 
fire.’ 

“As I read to them these words of John the Baptist, the monks became silent as 
if an invisible hand strangled their spirits, but they took false courage and 
commenced laughing. One of them said, ‘We have read these words many times, 
and we are not in need of a cow grazier to repeat them to us.” 

“T protested, ‘If you had read these words and comprehended their meaning, 
these poor villagers would not have frozen or starved to death.’ When I said this, 
one of the monks slapped my face as if I had spoken evil of the priests; another 
kicked me and a third took the book from me and a fourth one called the head 
priest who hurried to the scene shaking with anger. He cried out, ‘Arrest this 
rebel and drag him from this sacred place, and let the storm’s fury teach him 
obedience. Take him away and let nature do unto him the will of God, and then 
wash your hands of the poisonous germs of heresy infesting his raiment. If he 
should return pleading for forgiveness, do not open the door for him, for the 
viper will not become a dove if placed in a cage, nor will the briar bear figs if 
planted in the vineyards.’ 

“In accordance with the command, I was dragged out by the laughing monks. 
Before they locked the door behind me, I heard one saying, ‘Yesterday you were 
king of cows and pigs, and today you are dethroned, Oh Great Reformer; go now 
and be the king of wolves and teach them how to live in their lairs.’” 


Khalil sighed deeply, then turned his face and looked toward the flaming fire. 
With a sweet and loving voice, and with a pained countenance he said, “Thus 
was I expelled from the convent, and thus did the monks deliver me over to the 
hands of Death. I fought through the night blindly; the heavy wind was tearing 
my robe and the piling snow was trapping me feet and pulling me down until I 
fell, crying desperately for help. I felt that no one heard me except Death, but a 
power which is all knowledge and mercy had heard my cry. That power did not 
want me to die before I had learned what is left of life’s secrets. That power sent 
you both to me to save my life from the depth of the abyss and non-existence.” 

Rachel and Miriam felt as if their spirits understood the mystery of his soul, 
and they became his partners in feeling and understanding. Notwithstanding her 
will, Rachel stretched forth and touched his hand gently while tears coursed 
down from her eyes, and she said, “He who has been chosen by heaven as a 
defender of Truth will not perish by heaven’s own storms and snow.” And 
Miriam added, “The storms and snow may kill the flowers, but cannot deaden 
the seeds, for the snow keeps them warm from the killing frost.” 

Khalil’s face brightened upon hearing those words of encouragement, and he 
said, “If you do not look upon me as a rebel and an heretic as the monks did, the 
persecution which I have sustained in the convent is the symbol of an oppressed 
nation that has not yet attained knowledge; and this night in which I was on the 
verge of death is like a revolution that precedes full justice. And from a sensitive 
woman’s heart springs the happiness of mankind, and from the kindness of her 
noble spirit comes mankind’s affection.” 

He closed his eyes and leaned down on the pillow; the two women did not 
bother him with further conversation for they knew that the weariness cause by 
long exposure had allured and captured his eyes. Khalil slept like a lost child 
who had finally found safety in his mother’s arms. 

Rachel and her daughter slowly walked to their bed and sat there watching him 
as if they had found in his trouble-torn face an attraction bringing their souls and 
hearts closer to him. And the mother whispered, saying, “There is a strange 
power in his closed eyes that speaks in silence and stimulates the soul’s desires.” 

And Miriam rejoined, “His hands, Mother, are like those of Christ in the 
Church.” The mother replied, “His face possesses at the same time a woman’s 
tenderness and a man’s boldness.” 

And the wings of slumber carried the two women’s spirits into the world of 
dream, and the fire went down and turned into ashes, while the light of the oil 


lamp dimmed gradually and disappeared. The fierce tempest continued its roar, 
and the obscured sky spread layers of snow, and the strong wind scattered them 
to the right and the left. 


Part Four 


Five days passed, and the sky was still heavy with snow, burying the mountains 
and prairies relentlessly. Khalil made three attempts to resume his journey 
toward the plains, but Rachel restrained him each time, saying, “Do not give up 
your life to the blind elements, brother; remain here, for the bread that suffices 
two will also feed three, and the fire will still be burning after your departure as 
it was before your arrival. We are poor, brother, but like the rest of the people, 
we live our lives before the face of the sun and mankind, and God gives us our 
daily bread.” 

And Miriam was begging him with her kind glances, and pleading with her 
deep sighs, for since he entered the hut she felt the presence of a divine power in 
her soul sending forth life and light into her heart and awakening new affection 
in the Holy of Holies of her spirit. For the first time she experienced the feeling 
which made her heart like a white rose that sips the dew drops from the dawn 
and breathes its fragrance into the endless firmament. 

There is no affection purer and more soothing to the spirit than the one hidden 
in the heart of a maiden who awakens suddenly and fills her own spirit with 
heavenly music that makes her days like poets’ dreams and her nights prophetic. 
There is no secret in the mystery of life stronger and more beautiful than that 
attachment which converts the silence of a virgin’s spirit into a perpetual 
awareness that makes a person forget the past, for it kindles fiercely in the heart 
the sweet and overwhelming hope of the coming future. 

The Lebanese woman distinguishes herself from the woman of other nations 
by her simplicity. The manner in which she is trained restricts her progress 
educationally, and stands as a hindrance to her future. Yet for this reason, she 
finds herself inquiring of herself as to the inclination and mystery of her heart. 
The Lebanese young woman is like a spring that comes out from the heart of the 
earth and follows its course through the winding depressions, but since it cannot 
find an outlet to the sea, it turns into a calm lake that reflects upon its growing 
surface the glittering stars and the shining moon. Khalil felt the vibration of 


Miriam’s heart twining steadily about his soul, and he knew that the divine torch 
that illuminated his heart had also touched her heart. He rejoiced for the first 
time, like a parched brook greeting the rain, but he blamed himself for his haste, 
believing that this spiritual understanding would pass like a cloud when he 
departed from the village. He often spoke to himself saying, “What is this 
mystery that plays so great a part in our lives? What is this Law that drives us 
into a rough road and stops us just before we reach the mountain top, smiling 
and glorying, then suddenly we are cast to the depths of the valley, weeping and 
suffering? What is this life that embraces us like a lover one day, and fights us 
like an enemy the second day? Was I not persecuted yesterday? Did I not survive 
hunger and thirst and suffering and mockery for the sake of the Truth which 
heaven had awakened in my heart? Did I not tell the monks that happiness 
through Truth is the will and the purpose of God in man? Then what is this fear? 
And why do I close my eyes to the light that emanates from that young woman’s 
eyes? I am expelled and she is poor, but is it on bread only that man can live? 
Are we not, between famine and plenty, like trees between winter and summer? 
But what would Rachel say if she knew that my heart and her daughter’s heart 
came to an understanding in silence, and approached close to each other and 
neared the circle of the Supreme Light? What would she say if she discovered 
that the young man whose life she saved longed to gaze upon her daughter? 
What would the simple villagers say if they knew that a young man, reared in the 
convent, came to their village by necessity and expulsion, and desired to live 
near a beautiful maiden? Will they listen to me if I tell them that he who leaves 
the convent to live amongst them is like a bird that flies from the bruising walls 
of the cage to the light of freedom? What will Sheik Abbas say if he hears my 
story? What will the priest of the village do if he learns of the cause of my 
expulsion?” 

Khalil was talking to himself in this fashion while sitting by the fireplace, 
meditating the flames, symbol of his love; and Miriam was stealing a glance now 
and then at his face and reading his dreams through his eyes, and hearing the 
echo of his thoughts, and feeling the touch of his love, even though no word was 
uttered. 

One night, as he stood by the small transom that faced the valleys where the 
trees and rocks were shrouded with white coverings, Miriam came and stood by 
him, looking at the sky. As their eyes turned and met, he drew a deep sigh and 
shut his eyes as if his soul were sailing in the spacious sky looking for a word. 
He found no word necessary, for the silence spoke for them. Miriam ventured, 


“Where will you go when the snow meets the stream and the paths are dry?” His 
eyes opened, looking beyond the horizon, and he explained, “I shall follow the 
path to wherever my destiny and my mission for truth shall take me.” Miriam 
sighed sadly and offered, “Why will you not remain here and live close to us? Is 
it that you are obliged to go elsewhere?” He was moved by her kindness and 
sweet words, but protested, “The villagers here will not accept an expelled monk 
as their neighbour, and will not permit him to breathe the air they breathe 
because they believe that the enemy of the convent is an infidel, cursed by God 
and His saints.” Miriam resorted to silence, for the Truth that pained her 
prevented further talk. Then Khalil turned aside and explained, “Miriam, these 
villagers are taught by those in authority to hate everyone who thinks freely; 
they are trained to remain afar from those whose minds soar aloft; God does not 
like to be worshipped by an ignorant man who imitates someone else; if I 
remained in this village and asked the people to worship as they please, they 
would say that I am an infidel disobeying the authority that was given to the 
priest by God. If I asked them to listen and hear the voices of their hearts and do 
according to the will of the spirit within, they would say I am an evil man who 
wants them to do away with the clergy that God placed between heaven and 
earth.” Khalil looked straight into Miriam’s eyes, and with a voice that bespoke 
the sound of silver strings said, “But, Miriam, there is a magic power in this 
village that possesses me and engulfs my soul; a power so divine that it causes 
me to forget my pain. In this village I met Death to his very face, and in this 
place my soul embraced God’s spirit. In this village there is a beautiful flower 
grown over the lifeless grass; its beauty attracts my heart and it fragrance fills its 
domain. Shall I leave this important flower and go out preaching the ideas that 
caused my expulsion from the convent, or shall I remain by the side of that 
flower and dig a grave and bury my thoughts and truths among its neighbouring 
thorns? What shall I do, Miriam?” Upon hearing these words, she shivered like a 
lily before the frolicsome breeze of the dawn. Her heart glowed through her eyes 
when she faltered, “We are both in the hands of a mysterious ad merciful power. 
Let it do its will.” 

At that moment the two hearts joined and thereafter both spirits were one 
burning torch illuminating their lives. 


Part Five 


Since the beginning of the creation and up to our present time, certain clans, rich 
by inheritance, in co-operation with the clergy, had appointed themselves the 
administrators of the people. It is an old, gaping wound in the heart of society 
that cannot be removed except by intense removal of ignorance. 

The man who acquires his wealth by inheritance builds his mansion with the 
weak poor’s money. The clergyman erects his temple upon the graves and bones 
of the devoted worshippers. The prince grasps the fellah’s arms while the priest 
empties his pocket; the ruler looks upon the sons of the fields with frowning 
face, and the bishop consoles them with his smile, and between the frown of the 
tiger and the smile of the wolf the flock is perished; the ruler claims himself as 
king of the law, and the priest as the representative of God, and between these 
two, the bodies are destroyed and the souls wither into nothing. 

In Lebanon, that mountain rich in sunlight and poor in knowledge, the noble 
and the priest joined hands to exploit the farmer who ploughed the land and 
reaped the crop in order to protect himself from the sword of the ruler and the 
curse of the priest. The rich man in Lebanon stood proudly by his palace and 
shouted at the multitudes saying, “The Sultan had appointed me as your lord.” 
And the priest stands before the altar saying, “God has delegated me as an 
executive of your souls.” But the Lebanese resorted to silence, for the dead could 
not talk. 

Sheik Abbas had friendship in his heart for the clergymen, because they were 
his allies in choking the people’s knowledge and reviving the spirit of stern 
obedience among his workers. 

That evening, when Khalil and Miriam were approaching the throne of Love, 
and Rachel was looking upon them with the eyes of affection, Father Elias 
informed Sheik Abbas that the head priest had expelled a rebellious young man 
from the convent and that he had taken refuge at the house of Rachel, the widow 
of Samaan Ramy. And the priest was not satisfied with the little information he 
gave the Sheik, but commented, “The demon they chased out of the convent 
cannot become an angel in this village, and the fig tree which is hewn and cast 
into the fire, does not bear fruit while burning. If we wish to clean this village of 
the filth of this beast, we must drive him away as the monks did.” And the Sheik 
answered, “Are you certain that the young man will be a bad influence upon our 
people? Is it not better for us to keep him and make him a worker in our 
vineyards? We are in need of strong men.” 


The priest’s face showed his disagreement. Combing his beard with his 
fingers, he said shrewdly, “If he were fit to work, he would not have been 
expelled from the convent. A student who works in the convent, and who 
happened to spend last night at my house, informed me that this young man had 
violated the rules of the head priest by preaching danger-ridden ideas among the 
monks, and he quoted him as saying, ‘Restore the fields and the vineyards and 
the silver of the convent to the poor and scatter it in all directions; and help the 
people who are in need of knowledge; by thus doing, you will please your Father 
in Heaven.’” 

On hearing these words, Sheik Abbas leaped to his feet, and like a tiger 
making ready to strike the victim, he walked to the door and called to the 
servants, ordering them to report immediately. Three men entered, and the Sheik 
commanded, “In the house of Rachel, the widow of Samaan Ramy, there is a 
young man wearing a monk’s raiment. Tie him and bring him here. If that 
woman objects to his arrest, drag her out by her braided hair over the snow and 
bring her with him, for he who helps evil is evil himself.” The men bowed 
obediently and hurried to Rachel’s home while the priest and the Sheik discussed 
the type of punishment to be awarded to Khalil and Rachel. 


Part Six 


The day was over and the night had come spreading its shadow over those 
wretched huts, heavily laden with snow. The stars finally appeared in the sky, 
like hopes in the coming eternity after the suffering of death’s agony. The doors 
and windows were closed and the lamps were lighted. The fellahin sat by the 
fireside, warming their bodies. Rachel, Miriam and Khalil were seated at a rough 
wooden table eating their evening meal when there was a knock at the door and 
three men entered. Rachel and Miriam were frightened, but Khalil remained 
calm, as if he awaited the coming of those men. One of the Sheik’s servants 
walked toward Khalil, laid his hand upon his shoulder and asked, “Are you the 
one who was expelled from the convent?” And Khalil responded, “Yes, I am the 
one, what do you want?” The man replied, “We are ordered to arrest you and 
take you with us to Sheik Abbas’ home, and if you object we shall drag you out 
like a butchered sheep over the snow.” 


Rachel turned pale as she exclaimed, “What crime has he committed, and why 


do you want to tie him and drag him out?” The two women pleaded with tearful 
voices, saying, “He is one individual in the hands of three and it is cowardly of 
you to make him suffer.” The men became enraged and shouted, “Is there any 
woman in this village who opposes the Sheik’s order?” And he drew forth a rope 
and started to tie Khalil’s hands. Khalil lifted his head proudly, and a sorrowful 
smile appeared on his lips when he said, “I feel sorry for you men, because you 
are a strong and blind instrument in the hands of a man who oppresses the weak 
with the strength of your arms. You are slaves of ignorance. Yesterday I was a 
man like you, but tomorrow you shall be free in mind as I am now. Between us 
there is a deep precipice that chokes my calling voice and hides my reality from 
you, and you cannot hear or see. Here I am, tie my hands and do as you please.” 
The three men were moved by his talk and it seemed that his voice had 
awakened in them a new spirit, but the voice of Sheik Abbas still rang in their 
minds, warning them to complete the mission. They bound his hands and led 
him out silently with a heavy conscience. Rachel and Miriam followed them to 
the Sheik’s home, like the daughters of Jerusalem who followed Christ to Mount 
Calvary. 


Part Seven 


Regardless of its import, news travels swiftly among the fellahin in the small 
villages, because their absence from the realm of society makes them anxious 
and busy in discussing the happenings of their limited environs. In winter, when 
the fields are slumbering under the quilts of snow, and when human life is taking 
refuge and warming itself by the fireside, the villagers become most inclined to 
learn of current news in order to occupy themselves. 

It was not long after Khalil was arrested, when the story spread like a 
contagious disease amongst the villagers. They left their huts and hurried like an 
army from every direction into the home of Sheik Abbas. When Khalil’s feet 
stepped into the Sheik’s home, the residence was crowded with men, women and 
children who were endeavouring for a glance at the infidel who was expelled 
from the convent. They were also anxious to see Rachel and her daughter, who 
had helped Khalil in spreading the hellish disease if heresy in the pure sky of 
their village. 

The Sheik took the seat of judgment and beside him sat Father Elias, while the 


throng was gazing at the pinioned youth who stood bravely before them. Rachel 
and Miriam were standing behind Khalil and trembling with fear. But what could 
fear do to the heart of a woman who found Truth and followed him? What could 
the scorn of the crowd do to the soul of a maiden who had been awakened by 
Love? Sheik Abbas looked at the young man, and with a thundering voice he 
interrogated him saying, “What is your name, man?” “Khalil is my name,” 
answered the youth. The Sheik returned, “Who are your father and mother and 
relatives, and where were you born?” Khalil turned toward the fellahin, who 
looked upon him with hateful eyes, and said, “The oppressed poor are my clan 
and my relatives, and this vast country is my birthplace.” 

Sheik Abbas, with an air of ridicule, said, “Those people whom you claim as 
kin demand that you be punished, and the country you assert as your birthplace 
objects to your being a member of its people.” Khalil replied, “The ignorant 
nations arrest their good men and turn them into their despots; and a country, 
ruled by a tyrant, persecutes those who try to free the people from the yoke of 
slavery. But will a good son leave his mother if she is ill? Will a merciful man 
deny his brother who is miserable? Those poor men who arrested me and 
brought me here today are the same ones who surrendered their lives to you 
yesterday. And this vast earth that disapproves my existence is the one that does 
not yawn and swallow the greedy despots.” 

The Sheik uttered a loud laugh, as if wanting to depress the young man’s spirit 
and prevent him from influencing the audience. He turned to Khalil and said 
impressively, “You cattle grazier, do you think that we will show more mercy 
than did the monks, who expelled you from the convent? Do you think that we 
feel pity for a dangerous agitator?” Khalil responded, “It is true that I was a 
cattle grazier, but I am glad that I was not a butcher. I led my herds to the rich 
pastures and never grazed them on arid land. I led my animals to pure springs 
and kept them from contaminated marshes. At eventide I brought them safely to 
their shed and never left them in the valleys as prey for the wolves. Thus I have 
treated the animals; and if you had pursued my course and treated human beings 
as I treated my flock, these poor people would not live in wretched huts and 
suffer the pangs of poverty, while you are living like Nero in this gorgeous 
mansion.” 

The Sheik’s forehead glittered with drops of perspiration, and his smirk turned 
into anger, but he tried to show only calm by pretending that he did not heed 
Khalil’s talk, and he expostulated, pointing at Khalil with his finger, “You are a 
heretic, and we shall not listen to your ridiculous talk; we summoned you to be 


tried as a criminal, and you realize that you are in the presence of the Lord off 
this village who is empowered to represent his Excellency Emir Ameen Shehab. 
You are standing before Father Elias, the representative of the Holy Church 
whose teachings you have opposed. Now, defend yourself, or kneel down before 
these people and we will pardon you and make you a cattle grazier, as you were 
in the convent.” Khalil calmly returned, “A criminal is not to be tried by another 
criminal, as an atheist will not defend himself before sinners.” And Khalil 
looked at the audience and spoke to them saying, “My brethren, the man whom 
you call the Lord of your fields, and to whom you have yielded thus long, has 
brought me to be tried before you in this edifice which he built upon the graves 
of your forefathers. And the man who became a pastor of your church through 
your faith, has come to judge me and help to humiliate me and increase my 
sufferings. You have hurried to this place from every direction to see me suffer 
and hear me plead for mercy. You have left your huts in order to witness your 
pinioned son and brother. You have come to see the prey trembling between the 
paws of a ferocious beast. You came here tonight to view an infidel standing 
before the judges. I am the criminal and I am the heretic who has been expelled 
from the convent. The tempest brought me into your village. Listen to my 
protest, and do not be merciful, but be just, for mercy is bestowed upon the 
guilty criminal, while justice is all that an innocent man requires. 

“T select you now as my jury, because the will of the people is the will of God. 
Awaken your hearts and listen carefully and then prosecute me according to the 
dictates of your conscience. You have been told that I am an infidel, but you 
have not been informed of what crime or sin I have committed. You have seen 
me tied like a thief, but you have not heard about my offences, for wrongdoings 
are not revealed in this court, while punishment comes out like thunder. My 
crime, dear fellowmen, is my understanding of your plight, for I felt the weight 
of the irons which have been placed upon your necks. My sin is my heartfelt 
sorrows for your women; it is my sympathy for your children who suck life from 
your breast mixed with the shadow of death. I am one of you, and my forefathers 
lived in these valleys and died under the same yolk which is bending your heads 
now. I believe in God who listens to the call of your suffering souls, and I 
believe in the Book that makes all of us brothers before the face of heaven. I 
believe in the teachings that make us all equal, and that render us unpinioned 
upon this earth, the steeping place of the careful feet of God. 

“As I was grazing my cows at the convent, and contemplating the sorrowful 
condition you tolerate, I heard a desperate cry coming from your miserable 


homes—a cry of oppressed souls—a cry of broken hearts which are locked in 
your bodies as slaves to the lord of these fields. As I looked, I found me in the 
convent and you in the fields, and I saw you as a flock of lambs following a wolf 
to the lair; and as I stopped in the middle of the road to aid the lambs, I cried for 
help and the wolf snapped me with his sharp teeth. 

“T have sustained imprisonment, thirst, and hunger for the sake of Truth that 
hurts only the body. I have undergone suffering beyond endurance because I 
turned your sad sighs into a crying voice that rang and echoed in every corner of 
the convent. I never felt fear, and my heart never tired, for your painful cry was 
injecting a new strength into me every day, and my heart was healthy. You may 
ask yourself now saying, ‘When did we ever cry for help, and who dares open 
his lips?’ But I say unto you, your souls are crying every day, and pleading for 
help every night, but you cannot hear them, for the dying man cannot hear his 
own heart rattling, while those who are standing by his bedside can surely hear. 
The slaughtered bird, in spite of his will, dances painfully and unknowingly, but 
those who witness the dance know what caused it. In what hour of the day do 
you sigh painfully? Is it in the morning, when love of existence cries at you and 
tears the veil of slumber off your eyes and leads you like slaves into the fields? 
Is it at noon, when you wish to sit under a tree to protect yourself from the 
burning sun? Or at eventide, when you return home hungry, wishing for 
sustaining food instead of a meagre morsel and impure water? Or at night when 
fatigue throws you upon your rough bed, and as soon as slumber closes your 
eyes, you sit up with open eyes, fearing that the Sheik’s voice is ringing in your 
ears? 

“In what season of the year do you not lament yourselves? Is it in Spring, 
when nature puts on her beautiful dress and you go to meet her with tattered 
raiment? Or in Summer, when you harvest the wheat and gather the sheaves of 
corn and fill the shelves of your master with the crop, and when the reckoning 
comes you receive naught but hay and tare? Is it in Autumn, when you pick the 
fruits and carry the grapes into the wine-press, and in reward for your toil you 
receive a jar of vinegar and a bushel of acorns? Or in Winter, when you are 
confined to your huts laden with snow, do you sit by the fire and tremble when 
the enraged sky urges you to escape from your weak minds? 

“This is the life of the poor; this is the perpetual cry I hear. This is what makes 
my spirit revolt against the oppressors and despise their conduct. When I asked 
the monks to have mercy upon you, they thought that I was an atheist, and 
expulsion was my lot. Today I came here to share this miserable life with you, 


and to mix my tears with yours. Here I am now, in the grip of your worst enemy. 
Do you realize that this land you are working like slaves was taken from your 
fathers when the law was written on the sharp edge of the sword? The monks 
deceived your ancestors and took all their fields and vineyards when the 
religious rules were written on the lips of the priests. Which man or woman is 
not influenced by the lord of the fields to do according to the will of the priests? 
God said, ‘With the sweat of thy brow, thou shall eat thy bread.’ But Sheik 
Abbas is eating his bread baked in the years of your lives and drinking his wine 
mixed with your tears. Did God distinguish this man from the rest of you while 
in his mother’s womb? Or is it your sin that made you his property? Jesus said, 
‘Gratis you have taken and gratis you shall give... Do not possess gold, nor 
silver, neither copper.’ Then what teachings allow the clergymen to sell their 
prayers for pieces of gold and silver? In the silence of the night you pray saying, 
‘Give us today our daily bread.’ God has given you this land from which to draw 
your daily bread, but what authority has He given the monks to take his land and 
this bread away from you? 

“You curse Judas because he sold his Master for a few pieces of silver, but you 
bless those who sell Him every day. Judas repented and hanged himself for his 
wrongdoing, but these priests walk proudly, dressed with beautiful robes, 
resplendent with shining crosses hanging over their chest. You teach your 
children to love Christ and at the same time you instruct them to obey those who 
oppose His teachings and violate His law. 

“The apostles of Christ were stoned to death in order to revive in you the Holy 
Spirit, but the monks and the priests are killing that spirit in you so they may live 
on your pitiful bounty. What persuades you to live such a life in this universe, 
full of misery and oppression? What prompts you to kneel before that horrible 
idol which has been erected upon the bones of your fathers? What treasure are 
you reserving for your posterity? 

“Your souls are in the grip of the priests, and your bodies are in the closing 
jaws of the rulers. What thing in life can you point at and say ‘this is mine!’ My 
fellowmen, do you know the priest you fear? He is a traitor who uses the Gospel 
as a threat to ransom your money... a hypocrite wearing a cross and using it as a 
sword to cut your veins... a wolf disguised in lambskin... a glutton who respects 
the tables more than the altars... a gold-hungry creature who follows the Denar 
to the farthest land... a cheat pilfering from widows and orphans. He is a queer 
being, with an eagle’s beak, a tiger’s clutches, a hyena’s teeth and a viper’s 
clothes. Take the Book away from him and tear his raiment off and pluck his 


beard and do whatever you wish unto him; then place in his hand one Denar, and 
he will forgive you smilingly. 

“Slap his face and spit on him and step on his neck; then invite him to sit at 
your board. He will immediately forget and untie his belt and gladly fill his 
stomach with your food. 

“Curse him and ridicule him; then send him a jar of wine or a basket of fruit. 
He will forgive you your sins. When he sees a woman, he turns his face, saying, 
‘Go from me, Oh, daughter of Babylon.’ Then he whispers to himself saying, 
‘Marriage is better than coveting.’ He sees the young men and women walking 
in the procession of Love, and he lifts his eyes toward heaven and says, ‘Vanity 
of vanities, all is vanity.’ And in his solitude he talks to himself saying, ‘May the 
laws and traditions that deny me the joys of life, be abolished.’ 

“He preaches to the people saying, ‘Judge not, lest ye be judged.’ But he 
judges all those who abhor his deeds and sends them to hell before Death 
separates them from this life. 

“When he talks he lifts his head toward heaven, but at the same time, his 
thoughts are crawling like snakes through your pockets. 

“He addresses you as beloved children, but his heart is empty of paternal love, 
and his lips never smile at a child, nor does he carry an infant between his arms. 

“He tells you, while shaking his head, ‘Let us keep away from earthly things, 
for life passes like a cloud.’ But if you look thoroughly at him, you will find that 
he is gripping on to life, lamenting the passing of yesterday, condemning the 
speed of today, and waiting fearfully for tomorrow. 

“He asks you for charity when he has plenty to give; if you grant his request, 
he will bless you publicly, and if you refuse him, he will curse you secretly. 

“In the temple he asks you to help the needy, and about his house the needy 
are begging for bread, but he cannot see or hear. 

“He sells his prayers, and he who does not buy is an infidel, excommunicated 
from Paradise. 

“This is the creature of whom you are afraid. This is the monk who sucks your 
blood. This is the priest who makes the sign of the Cross with the right hand, and 
clutches your throat with the left hand. 

“This is the pastor whom you appoint as your servant, but he appoints himself 
as your master. 


“This is the shadow that embraces your souls from birth until death. 


“This is the man who came to judge me tonight because my spirit revolted 
against the enemies of Jesus the Nazarene Who loved all and called us brothers, 
and Who died on the Cross for us.” 

Khalil felt that there was understanding in the villagers’ hearts; his voice 
brightened and he resumed his discourse saying, “Brethren, you know that Sheik 
Abbas has been appointed as Master of this village by Emir Shehab, the Sultan’s 
representative and Governor of the Province, but I ask you if anyone has seen 
that power appoint the Sultan as the god of this country. That Power, my 
fellowmen, cannot be seen, nor can you hear it talk, but you can feel its existence 
in the depths of your hearts. It is that Power which you worship and pray for 
every day saying, ‘Our Father which art in heaven.’ Yes, your Father Who is in 
heaven is the one Who appoints Kings and princes, for He is powerful and above 
all. But do you think that your Father, Who loved you and showed you the right 
path through His prophets, desires for you to be oppressed? Do you believe that 
God, Who brings forth the rain from heaven, and the wheat from the hidden 
seeds in the heart of the earth, desires for you to be hungry in order that but one 
man will enjoy His bounty? Do you believe that the Eternal Spirit Who reveals 
to you the wife’s love, the children’s pity and the neighbour’s mercy, would have 
upon you a tyrant to enslave you through your life? Do you believe that the 
Eternal Law that made life beautiful, would send you a man to deny you of that 
happiness and lead you into the dark dungeon of painful Death? Do you believe 
that your physical strength, provided you by nature, belongs beyond your body 
to the rich? 

“You cannot believe in all these things, because if you do you will be denying 
the justice of God who made us all equal, and the light of Truth that shines upon 
all people of the earth. What makes you struggle against yourselves, heart 
against body, and help those who enslave you while God has created you free on 
this earth? 

“Are you doing yourselves justice when you lift your eyes towards Almighty 
God and call him Father, and then turn around, bow your heads before a man, 
and call him Master? 

“Are you contented, as sons of God, with being slaves of man? Did not Christ 
call you brethren? Yet Sheik Abbas calls you servants. Did not Jesus make you 
free in Truth and Spirit? Yet the Emir made you slaves of shame and corruption. 
Did not Christ exalt you to heaven? Then why are you descending to hell? Did 
He not enlighten your hearts? Then why are you hiding your souls in darkness? 
God has placed a glowing torch in your hearts that glows in knowledge and 


beauty, and seeks the secrets of the days and nights; it is a sin to extinguish that 
torch and bury it in ashes. God has created your spirits with wings to fly in the 
spacious firmament of Love and Freedom; it is pitiful that you cut your wings 
with your own hands and suffer your spirits to crawl like insects upon the earth.” 

Sheik Abbas observed in dismay the attentiveness of the villagers, and 
attempted to interrupt, but Khalil, inspired, continued, “God has sown in your 
hearts the seeds of Happiness; it is a crime that you dig those seeds out and 
throw them wilfully on the rocks so the wind will scatter them and the birds will 
pick them. God has given you children to rear, to teach them the truth and fill 
their hearts with the most precious things of existence. He wants you to bequeath 
upon them the joy of Life and the bounty of Life; why are they now strangers to 
their place of birth and cold creatures before the face of the Sun? A father who 
makes his son a slave is the father who gives his child a stone when he asks for 
bread. Have you not seen the birds of the sky training their young ones to fly? 
Why, then, do you teach your children to drag the shackles of slavery? Have you 
not seen the flowers of the valleys deposit their seeds in the sun-heated earth? 
Then why do you commit your children to the cold darkness?” 

Silence prevailed for a moment, and it seemed as if Khalil’s mind were 
crowded with pain. But now with a low and compelling voice he continued, 
“The words which I utter tonight are the same expressions that caused my 
expulsion from the convent. If the lord of your fields and the pastor of your 
church were to prey upon me and kill me tonight, I will die happy and in peace 
because I have fulfilled my mission and revealed to you the Truth which demons 
consider a crime. I have now completed the will of the Almighty God.” 

There had been a magic message in Khalil’s voice that forced the villagers’ 
interest. The women were moved by the sweetness of peace, and their eyes were 
rich with tears. 

Sheik Abbas and Father Elias were shaking with anger. As Khalil finished, he 
walked a few steps and stopped near Rachel and Miriam. Silence dominated the 
courtroom, and it seemed as if Khalil’s spirit hovered in that vast hall and 
diverted the souls of the multitude from fearing Sheik Abbas and Father Elias, 
who sat trembling in annoyance and guilt. 

The Sheik stood suddenly and his face was pale. He looked toward the men 
who were standing about him as he said, “What has become of you, dogs? have 
your hearts been poisoned? Has you blood stopped running and weakened you 
so that you cannot leap upon this criminal and cut him to pieces? What awful 


thing has he done to you?” Having finished reprimanding the men, he raised a 
sword and started toward the fettered youth. 

The Sheik trembled visibly and the sword fell from his hand. He addressed the 
man saying, “Will a weak servant oppose his Master and benefactor?” And the 
man responded, “The faithful servant does not share his Master in the 
committing of crimes; this young man has spoken naught but the truth.” Another 
man stepped forward and assured, “This man is innocent and is worthy of 
honour and respect.” And a woman raised her voice saying, “He did not swear at 
God or curse any saint; why do you call him heretic?” And Rachel asked, “What 
is his crime?” The Sheik shouted, “You are rebellious, you miserable widow; 
have you forgotten the fate of your husband who turned rebel six years ago?” 
Upon hearing these impulsive words, Rachel shivered with painful anger, for she 
had found the murderer of her husband. She choked her tears and looked upon 
the throng and cried out, “Here is the criminal you have been trying for six years 
to find; you hear him now confessing his guilt. He is the killer who has been 
hiding his crime. Look at him and read his face; study him well and observe his 
fright; he shivers like the last leaf on winter’s tree. God has shown you that the 
Master whom you have always feared is a murderous criminal. He caused me to 
be a widow amongst these women, and my daughter an orphan amidst these 
children.” Rachel’s utterance fell like thunder upon the Sheik’s head, and the 
uproar of men and exaltation of women fell like firebrands upon him. 

The priest assisted the Sheik to his seat. Then he called the servants and 
ordered them saying, “Arrest this woman who has falsely accused your Master 
of killing her husband; drag her and this young man into a dark prison, and any 
who oppose you will be criminals, excommunicated as he was from the Holy 
Church.” The servants gave no heed to his command, but remained motionless 
staring at Khalil who was still bound with rope. Rachel stood at his right and 
Miriam at his left like a pair of wings ready to soar aloft into the spacious sky of 
Freedom. 

His beard shaking with anger, Father Elias said, “Are you denying your Master 
for the sake of an infidel criminal and a shameless adulteress?” And the oldest 
one of the servants answered him saying, “We have served Sheik Abbas long for 
bread and shelter, but we have never been his slaves.” Having thus spoken, the 
servant took off his cloak and turban and threw them before the Sheik and added, 
“T shall no longer require this raiment, nor do I wish my soul to suffer in the 
narrow house of a criminal.” And all the servants did likewise and joined the 
crowd whose faces radiated with joy, symbol of Freedom and Truth. Father Elias 


finally saw that his authority had declined, and left the place cursing the hour 
that brought Khalil to the village. A strong man strode to Khalil and untied his 
hands, looked at Sheik Abbas who fell like a corpse upon his seat, and boldly 
addressed him saying, “This fettered youth, whom you have brought here tonight 
to be tried as a criminal, has lifted our depressed spirits and enlightened our 
hearts with Truth and Knowledge. And this poor widow whom Father Elias 
referred to as a false accuser has revealed to us the crime you committed six 
years past. We came here tonight to witness the trial of an innocent youth and a 
noble soul. Now, heaven has opened our eyes and has shown us your atrocity; 
we Shall leave you and ignore you and allow heaven to do its will.” 

Many voices were raised in that hall, and one could hear a certain man saying, 
“Let us leave this ill-famed residence for our homes.” And another one 
remarking, “Let us follow this young man to Rachel’s home and listen to his 
wise sayings and consoling wisdom.” And a third one saying, “Let us seek his 
advice, for he knows our needs.” And a fourth one calling out, “If we are seeking 
justice, let us complain to the Emir and tell him of Abbas’ crime.” And many 
were saying, “Let us petition the Emir to appoint Khalil as our Master and ruler, 
and tell the Bishop that Father Elias was a partner in these crimes.” While the 
voices were rising and falling upon the Sheik’s ears like sharp arrows, Khalil 
lifted his hands and calmed the villagers saying, “My brethren, do not seek haste, 
but rather listen and meditate. I ask you, in the name of my love and friendship 
for you, not to go to the Emir, for you will not find justice. Remember that a 
ferocious beast does not snap another one like him, neither should you go to the 
Bishop, for he knows well that the house cloven amid itself shall be ruined. Do 
not ask the Emir to appoint me as the Sheik in this village, for the faithful 
servant does not like to be an aid to the evil Master. If I deserve your kindness 
and love, let me live amongst you and share with you the happiness and sorrows 
of Life. Let me join hands and work with you at home and in the fields, for if I 
could not make myself one of you, I would be a hypocrite who does not live 
according to his sermon. And now, as the axe is laid unto the root of the tree, let 
us leave Sheik Abbas alone in the courtroom of his conscience and before the 
Supreme Court of God whose sun shines upon the innocent and the criminal.” 

Having thus spoken, he left the place, and the multitude followed him as if 
there were a divine power in him that attracted their hearts. The Sheik remained 
alone with the terrible silence, like a destroyed tower, suffering his defeat quietly 
like a surrendering commander. When the multitude reached the church yard and 
the moon was just showing from behind the cloud, Khalil looked at them with 


the eyes of love like a good shepherd watching over his herd. He was moved 
with sympathy upon these villagers who symbolized an oppressed nation; and he 
stood like a prophet who saw all the nations of the East walking in those valleys 
and dragging empty souls and heavy hearts. 

He raised both hands toward heaven and said, “From the bottom of these 
depths we call thee, Oh, Liberty. Give heed to us! From behind the darkness we 
raise our hands to thee, Oh, Liberty. Look upon us! Upon the snow, we worship 
before thee, Oh, Liberty. Have mercy on us! Before thy great throne we stand, 
hanging on our bodies the blood-stained garments of our forefathers, covering 
our heads with the dust of the graves mixed with their remains, carrying the 
swords that stabbed their hearts, lifting the spears that pierced their bodies, 
dragging the chains that slowed their feet, uttering the cry that wounded their 
throats, lamenting and repeating the song of our failure that echoed throughout 
the prison, and repeating the prayers that came from the depths of our fathers’ 
hearts. Listen to us, Oh, Liberty, and hear us. From the Nile to the Euphrates 
comes the wailing of the suffering souls, in unison with the cry of the abyss; and 
from the end of the East to the mountains of Lebanon, hands are stretched to 
you, trembling with the presence of Death. From the shores of the sea to the end 
of the desert, tear-flooded eyes look beseechingly toward you. Come, Oh 
Liberty, and save us. 

“In the wretched huts standing in the shadow of poverty and oppression, they 
beat at their bosoms, soliciting thy mercy; watch us, Oh Liberty, and have mercy 
on us. In the pathways and in the houses miserable youth calls thee; in the 
churches and the mosques, the forgotten Book turns to thee; in the courts and in 
the palaces the neglected Law appeals to thee. Have mercy on us, Oh Liberty, 
and save us. In our narrow streets the merchant sells his days in order to make 
tribute to the exploiting thieves of the West, and none would give him advice. In 
the barren fields the fellah tills the soil and sows the seeds of his heart and 
nourishes them with his tears, but he reaps naught except thorns, and none would 
teach him the true path. In our arid plains the Bedouin roams barefoot and 
hungry, but none would have mercy upon him; speak, Oh Liberty, and teach us! 
Our sick lambs are grazing upon the grassless prairie, our calves are gnawing on 
the roots of the trees, and our horses are feeding on dry plants. Come, Oh 
Liberty, and help us. We have been living in darkness since the beginning, and 
like prisoners they take us from one prison to another, while time ridicules our 
plight. When will dawn come? Until when shall we bear the scorn of the ages? 
Many a stone have we been dragging, and many a yoke has been placed upon 


our necks. Until when shall we bear this human outrage? The Egyptian slavery, 
the Babylon exile, the tyranny of Persia, the despotism of the Romans, and the 
greed of Europe... all these things have we suffered. Where are we going now, 
and when shall we reach the sublime end of the rough roadway? From the 
clutches of Pharaoh to the paws of Nebuchadnezzar, to the iron hands of 
Alexander, to the swords of Herod, to the talons of Nero, and the sharp teeth of 
Demon... into whose hands are we now to fall, and when will Death come and 
take us, SO we may rest at last? 

“With the strength of our arms we lifted the columns of the temple, and upon 
our backs we carried the mortar to build the great walls and the impregnable 
pyramids for the sake of glory. Until when shall we continue building such 
magnificent palaces and living in wretched huts? Until when shall we continue 
filling the bins of the rich with provisions, while sustaining weak life on dry 
morsels? Until when shall we continue weaving silk and wool for our lords and 
masters while we wear naught except tattered swaddles? 

“Through their wickedness we were divided amongst ourselves; and the better 
to keep their thrones and be at ease, they armed the Druze to fight the Arab, and 
stirred up the Shiite to attack the Sunnite, and encouraged the Kurdish to butcher 
the Bedouin, and cheered the Mohammedan to dispute with the Christian. Until 
when shall a brother continue killing his own brother upon his mother’s bosom? 
Until when shall the Cross be kept apart from the Crescent before the eyes of 
God? Oh Liberty, hear us, and speak in behalf of but one individual, for a great 
fire is started with a small spark. Oh Liberty, awaken but one heart with the 
rustling of thy wings, for from one cloud alone comes the lightning which 
illuminates the pits of the valleys and the tops of the mountains. Disperse with 
thy power these black clouds and descend like thunder and destroy the thrones 
that were built upon the bones and skulls of our ancestors.” 

“Hear us, Oh Liberty; Bring mercy, Oh Daughter of Athens; Rescue us, Oh 
Sister of Rome; Advise us, Oh Companion of Moses; Help us, Oh Beloved of 
Mohammed ; Teach us, Oh Bride of Jesus; Strengthen our hearts so we may live; 
Or harden our enemies so we may perish And live in peace eternally.” 

As Khalil was pouring forth his sentiment before heaven, the villagers were 
gazing at him in reverence, and their love was springing forth in unison with the 
song of his voice until they felt that he became part of their hearts. After a short 
silence, Khalil brought his eyes upon the multitude and quietly said, “Night has 
brought us to the house of Sheik Abbas in order to realize the daylight; 
oppression has arrested us before the cold Space, so we may understand one 


another and gather like chicks under the wings of the Eternal Spirit. Now let us 
go to our homes and sleep until we meet again tomorrow.” 

Having thus spoken, he walked away, following Rachel and Miriam to their 
poor hovel. The throng departed and each went to his home, contemplating what 
he had seen and heard this memorable night. They felt that a burning torch of a 
new spirit had scoured their inner selves and led them into the right path. In an 
hour all the lamps were extinguished and Silence engulfed the whole village 
while Slumber carried the fellahin’s souls into the world of strong dreams; but 
Sheik Abbas found no sleep all night, as he watched the phantoms of darkness 
and the horrible ghosts of his crimes in procession. 

Two months had already passed and Khalil was still preaching and pouring his 
sentiments in the villagers’ hearts, reminding them of their usurped rights and 
showing them the greed and oppression of the rulers and the monks. They 
listened to him with care for he was a source of pleasure; his words fell upon 
their hearts like rain upon thirsty land. In their solitude, they repeated Khalil’s 
sayings as they did their daily prayers. Father Elias commenced fawning upon 
them to regain their friendship; he became docile since the villagers found out 
that he was the Sheik’s ally in crime, and the fellahin ignored him. 

Sheik Abbas had a nervous suffering, and walked through his mansion like a 
caged tiger. He issued commands to his servants, but no one answered except the 
echo of his voice inside the marble walls. He shouted at his men, but no one 
came to his aid except his poor wife who suffered the pang of his cruelty as 
much as the villagers did. When Lent came and Heaven announced the coming 
of Spring, the days of the Sheik expired with the passing of Winter. He died after 
a long agony, and his soul was carried away on the carpet of his deeds to stand 
naked and shivering before that high Throne whose existence we feel, but cannot 
see. The fellahin heard various tales about the manner of Sheik Abbas’ death; 
some of them related that the Sheik died insane, while others insisted that 
disappointment and despair drove him to death by his own hand. But the women 
who went to offer their sympathies to his wife reported that he died from fear, 
because the ghost of Samaan Ramy hunted him and drove him every midnight 
out to the place where Rachel’s husband was found slain six years before. 

The month of Nisan proclaimed to the villagers the love secrets of Khalil and 
Miriam. They rejoiced the good tidings which assured them that Khalil would 
thereby remain in their village. As the news reached all the inhabitants of the 
huts, they congratulated one another upon Khalil’s becoming their beloved 
neighbour. 


When harvest time came, the fellahin went to the fields and gathered the 
sheaves of corn and bundles of wheat to the threshing floor. Sheik Abbas was 
not there to take the crop and have it carried to his bins. Each fellah harvested 
his own crop; the villagers’ huts were filled with good wine and corn; their 
vessels were replenished with good wine and oil. Khalil shared with them their 
toils and happiness; he helped them in gathering the crop, pressing the grapes 
and picking the fruits. He never distinguished himself from any one of them 
except by his excess of love and ambition. Since that year and up to our present 
time, each fellah in that village commenced to reap with joy the crop which he 
sowed with toil and labour. The land which the fellahin tilled and the vineyards 
they cultivated became their own property. 

Now, half a century has passed since this incident, and the Lebanese have 
awakened. 

On his way to the Holy Cedars of Lebanon, a traveller’s attention is caught by 
the beauty of that village, standing like a bride at the side of the valley. The 
wretched huts are now comfortable and happy homes surrounded by fertile fields 
and blooming orchards. If you ask any one of the residents about Sheik Abbas’ 
history, he will answer you, pointing with his finger to a heap of demolished 
stones and destroyed walls saying, “This is the Sheik’s palace, and this is the 
history of his life.” And if you inquire about Khalil, he will raise his hand toward 
heaven saying, “There resides our beloved Khalil, whose life’s history was 
written by God with glittering letters upon the pages of our hearts, and they 
cannot be effaced by the ages.” 


THE WANDERER—HIS PARABLES AND HIS 
SAYINGS 


The Wanderer 
(> = = C) 


I met him at the crossroads, a man with but a cloak and a staff, and a veil of pain 
upon his face. And we greeted one another, and I said to him, “Come to my 
house and be my guest.” 

And he came. 

My wife and my children met us at the threshold, and he smiled at them, and 
they loved his coming. 

Then we all sat together at the board and we were happy with the man for 
there was a silence and a mystery in him. 

And after supper we gathered to the fire and I asked him about his wanderings. 

He told us many a tale that night and also the next day, but what I now record 
was born out of the bitterness of his days though he himself was kindly, and 
these tales are of the dust and patience of his road. 

And when he left us after three days we did not feel that a guest had departed 
but rather that one of us was still out in the garden and had not yet come in. 


Garments 
OO — a C) 


Upon a day Beauty and Ugliness met on the shore of a sea. And they said to one 
another, “Let us bathe in the sea.” 

Then they disrobed and swam in the waters. And after a while Ugliness came 
back to shore and garmented himself with the garments of Beauty and walked 
away. 

And Beauty too came out of the sea, and found not her raiment, and she was 
too shy to be naked, therefore she dressed herself with the raiment of Ugliness. 
And Beauty walked her way. 

And to this very day men and women mistake the one for the other. 

Yet some there are who have beheld the face of Beauty, and they know her 
notwithstanding her garments. And some there be who know the face of 
Ugliness, and the cloth conceals him not from their eyes. 


The Eagle and the Skylark 
(QO os = C) 


A skylark and an eagle met on a rock upon a high hill. The skylark said, “Good 
morrow to you, Sir.’ And the eagle looked down upon him and said faintly, 
“Good morrow.” 

And the skylark said, “I hope all things are well with you, Sir.” 

“Aye,” said the eagle, “all is well with us. But do you not know that we are the 
king of birds, and that you shall not address us before we ourselves have 
spoken?” 

Said the skylark, “Methinks we are of the same family.” 

The eagle looked upon him with disdain and he said, “Whoever has said that 
you and I are of the same family?” 

Then said the skylark, “But I would remind you of this, I can fly even as high 
as you, and I can sing and give delight to the other creatures of this earth. And 
you give neither pleasure nor delight.” 

Then the eagle was angered, and he said, “Pleasure and delight! You little 
presumptuous creature! With one thrust of my beak I could destroy you. You are 
but the size of my foot.” 

Then the skylark flew up and alighted upon the back of the eagle and began to 
pick at his feathers. The eagle was annoyed, and he flew swift and high that he 
might rid himself of the little bird. But he failed to do so. At last he dropped 
back to that very rock upon the high hill, more fretted than ever, with the little 
creature still upon his back, and cursing the fate of the hour. 

Now at that moment a small turtle came by and laughed at the sight, and 
laughed so hard the she almost turned upon her back. 

And the eagle looked down upon the turtle and he said, “You slow creeping 
thing, ever one with the earth, what are you laughing at?” 

And the turtle said, “Why I see that you are turned horse, and that you have a 
small bird riding you, but the small bird is the better bird.” 


And the eagle said to her, “Go you about your business. This is a family affair 
between my brother, the lark, and myself.” 


The Love Song 


2 C 


Sesrr—S 2. 


A poet once wrote a love song and it was beautiful. And he made many copies of 
it, and sent them to his friends and his acquaintances, both men and women, and 
even to a young woman whom he had met but once, who lived beyond the 
mountains. 

And in a day or two a messenger came from the young woman bringing a 
letter. And in the letter she said, “Let me assure you, I am deeply touched by the 
love song that you have written to me. Come now, and see my father and my 
mother, and we shall make arrangements for the betrothal.” 

And the poet answered the letter, and he said to her, “My friend, it was but a 
song of love out of a poet’s heart, sung by every man to every woman.” 

And she wrote again to him saying, “Hypocrite and liar in words! From this 
day unto my coffin-day I shall hate all poets for your sake.” 


Tears and Laughter 


C 


> = -_ ) 


Upon the bank of the Nile at eventide, a hyena met a crocodile and they stopped 
and greeted one another. 

The hyena spoke and said, “How goes the day with you, Sir?” 

And the crocodile answered saying, “It goes badly with me. Sometimes in my 
pain and sorrow I weep, and then the creatures always say, “They are but 
crocodile tears.’ And this wounds me beyond all telling.” 

Then the hyena said, “You speak of your pain and your sorrow, but think of me 
also, for a moment. I gaze at the beauty of the world, its wonders and its 
miracles, and out of sheer joy I laugh even as the day laughs. And then the 
people of the jungle say, ‘It is but the laughter of a hyena.’” 


At the Fair 
‘2, = = C) 


There came to the Fair a girl from the country-side, most comely. There was a 
lily and a rose in her face. There was a sunset in her hair, and dawn smiled upon 
her lips. 

No sooner did the lovely stranger appear in their sight than the young men 
sought her and surrounded her. One would dance with her, and another would 
cut a cake in her honour. And they all desired to kiss her cheek. For after all, was 
it not the Fair? 

But the girl was shocked and started, and she thought ill of the young men. 
She rebuked them, and she even struck one or two of them in the face. Then she 
ran away from them. 

And on her way home that evening she was saying in her heart, “I am 
disgusted. How unmannerly and ill bred are these men. It is beyond all 
patience.” 

A year passed during which that very comely girl thought much of Fairs and 
men. Then she came again to the Fair with the lily and the rose in her face, the 
sunset in her hair and the smile of dawn upon her lips. 

But now the young men, seeing her, turned from her. And all the daylong she 
was unsought and alone. 

And at eventide as she walked the road toward her home she cried in her heart, 
“T am disgusted. How unmannerly and ill bred are these youths. It is beyond all 
patience.” 


The Two Princesses 


In the city of Shawakis lived a prince, and he was loved by everyone, men and 
women and children. Even the animals of the field came unto him in greeting. 

But all the people said that his wife, the princess, loved him not; nay, that she 
even hated him. 

And upon a day the princess of a neighbouring city came to visit the princess 
of Shawakis. And they sat and talked together, and their words led to their 
husbands. 

And the princess of Sharakis said with passion, “I envy you your happiness 
with the prince, your husband, though you have been married these many years. 
I hate my husband. He belongs not to me alone, and I am indeed a woman most 
unhappy.” 

Then the visiting princess gazed at her and said, “My friend, the truth is that 
you love your husband. Aye, and you still have him for a passion unspent, and 
that is life in woman like unto Spring in a garden. But pity me, and my husband, 
for we do but endure one another in silent patience. And yet you and others 
deem this happiness.” 


The Lightning Flash 
Sesare—S 


There was a Christian bishop in his cathedral on a stormy day, and an un- 
Christian woman came and stood before him, and she said, “I am not a Christian. 
Is there salvation for me from hell-fire?” 

And the bishop looked upon the woman, and he answered her saying, “Nay, 
there is salvation for those only who are baptized of water and of the spirit.” 

And even as he spoke a bolt from the sky fell with thunder upon the cathedral 
and it was filled with fire. And the men of the city came running, and they saved 
the woman, but the bishop was consumed, food of the fire. 


The Hermit and the Beasts 


Once there lived among the green hills a hermit. He was pure of spirit and white 
of heart. And all the animals of the land and all the fowls of the air came to him 
in pairs and he spoke unto them. They heard him gladly, and they would gather 
near unto him, and would not go until nightfall, when he would send them away, 
entrusting them to the wind and the woods with his blessing. 

Upon an evening as he was speaking of love, a leopard raised her head and 
said to the hermit, “You speak to us of loving. Tell us, Sir, where is your mate?” 

And the hermit said, “I have no mate.” 

Then a great cry of surprise rose from the company of beasts and fowls, and 
they began to say among themselves, “How can he tell us of loving and mating 
when he himself knows naught thereof?” And quietly and in distain they left him 
alone. 

That night the hermit lay upon his mat with his face earthward, and he wept 
bitterly and beat his hands upon his breast. 


The Prophet and the Child 


Once on a day the prophet Sharia met a child in a garden. The child ran to him 
and said, “Good morrow to you, Sir,” and the prophet said, “Good morrow to 
you, Sir.” And in a moment, “I see that you are alone.” 

Then the child said, in laughter and delight, “It took a long time to lose my 
nurse. She thinks I am behind those hedges; but can’t you see that I am here?” 
Then he gazed at the prophet’s face and spoke again. “You are alone, too. What 
did you do with your nurse?” 

The prophet answered and said, “Ah, that is a different thing. In very truth I 
cannot lose her often time. But now, when I came into this garden, she was 
seeking after me behind the hedges.” 

The child clapped his hands and cried out, “So you are like me! Isn’t it good to 
be lost?” And then he said, “Who are you?” 

And the man answered, “They call me the prophet Sharia. And tell me, who 
are you?” 

“T am only myself,” said the child, “and my nurse is seeking after me, and she 
does not know where I am.” 

Then the prophet gazed into space saying, “I too have escaped my nurse for 
awhile, but she will find me out.” 

And the child said, “I know mine will find me out too.” 

At that moment a woman’s voice was heard calling the child’s name, “See,” 
said the child, “I told you she would be finding me.” 

And at the same moment another voice was heard, “Where art thou, Sharia?” 

And the prophet said, “See my child, they have found me also.” 

And turning his face upward, Sharia answered, “Here I am.” 


The Pearl 


Said one oyster to a neighbouring oyster, “I have a very great pain within me. It 
is heavy and round and I am in distress.” 

And the other oyster replied with haughty complacence, “Praise be to the 
heavens and to the sea, I have no pain within me. I am well and whole both 
within and without.” 

At that moment a crab was passing by and heard the two oysters, and he said 
to the one who was well and whole both within and without, “Yes, you are well 
and whole; but the pain that your neighbour bears is a pearl of exceeding 
beauty.” 


Body and Soul 


A man and a woman sat by a window that opened upon Spring. They sat close 
one unto the other. And the woman said, “I love you. You are handsome, and 
you are rich, and you are always well-attired.” 

And the man said, “I love you. You are a beautiful thought, a thing too apart to 
hold in the hand, and a song in my dreaming.” 

But the woman turned from him in anger, and she said, “Sir, please leave me 
now. I am not a thought, and I am not a thing that passes in your dreams. I am a 
woman. I would have you desire me, a wife, and the mother of unborn 
children.” 

And they parted. 

And the man was saying in his heart, “Behold another dream is even now 
turned into mist.” 

And the woman was saying, “Well, what of a man who turns me into a mist 
and a dream?” 


The King 
(2 — = C) 


The people of the kingdom of Sadik surrounded the palace of their king shouting 
in rebellion against him. And he came down the steps of the palace carrying his 
crown in one hand and his sceptre in the other. The majesty of his appearance 
silenced the multitude, and he stood before them and said, “My friends, who are 
no longer my subjects, here I yield my crown and sceptre unto you. I would be 
one of you. I am only one man, but as a man I would work together with you that 
our lot may be made better. There is no need for king. Let us go therefore to the 
fields and the vineyards and labour hand with hand. Only you must tell me to 
what field or vineyard I should go. All of you now are king.” 

And the people marvelled, and stillness was upon them, for the king whom 
they had deemed the source of their discontent now yielding his crown and 
sceptre to them and became as one of them. 

Then each and every one of them went his way, and the king walked with one 
man to a field. 

But the Kingdom of Sadik fared not better without a king, and the mist of 
discontent was still upon the land. The people cried out in the market places 
saying that they have a king to rule them. And the elders and the youths said as if 
with one voice, “We will have our king.” 

And they sought the king and found him toiling in the field, and they brought 
him to his seat, and yielded unto his crown and his sceptre. And they said, “Now 
rule us, with might and with justice.” 

And he said, “I will indeed rule you with might, and may the gods of the 
heaven and the earth help me that I may also rule with justice.” 

Now, there came to his presence men and women and spoke unto him of a 
baron who mistreated them, and to whom they were but serfs. 

And straightway the king brought the baron before him and said, “The life of 
one man is as weighty in the scales of God as the life of another. And because 


you know not how to weigh the lives of those who work in your fiends and your 
vineyards, you are banished, and you shall leave this kingdom forever.” 

The following day came another company to the king and spoke of the cruelty 
of a countess beyond the hills, and how she brought them down to misery. 
Instantly the countess was brought to court, and the king sentenced her also to 
banishment, saying, “Those who till our fields and care for our vineyards are 
nobler than we who eat the bread they prepare and drink the wine of their wine- 
press. And because you know not this, you shall leave this land and be afar from 
this kingdom.” 

Then came men and women who said that the bishop made them bring stones 
and hew the stones for the cathedral, yet he gave them naught, though they knew 
the bishop’s coffer was full of gold and silver while they themselves were empty 
with hunger. 

And the king called for the bishop, and when the bishop came the king spoke 
and said unto his, “That cross you wear upon your bosom should mean giving 
life unto life. But you have taken life from life and you have given none. 
Therefore you shall leave this kingdom never to return.” 

Thus each day for a full moon men and women came to the king to tell him of 
the burdens laid upon them. And each and every day a full moon some oppressor 
was exiled from the land. 

And the people of Sadik were amazed, and there was cheer in their heart. 

And upon a day the elders and the youths came and surrounded the tower of 
the king and called for him. And he came down holding his crown with one hand 
and his sceptre with the other. 

And he spoke unto and said, “Now, what would you do of me? Behold, I yield 
back to you that which you desired me to hold.” 

But they cried. “Nay, nay, you are our rightful king. You have made clean the 
land of vipers, and you have brought the wolves to naught, and we welcome to 
sing our thanksgiving unto you. The crown is yours in majesty and the sceptre is 
yours in glory.” 

Then the king said, “Not I, not I. You yourselves are king. When you deemed 
me weak and a misruler, you yourselves were weak and misruling. And now the 
land fares well because it is in your will. I am but a thought in the mind of you 
all, and I exist not save in your actions. There is no such person as governor. 
Only the governed exist to govern themselves.” 

And the king re-entered his tower with his crown and his sceptre. And the 


elders and the youths went their various ways and they were content. 


And each and every one thought of himself as king with a crown in one hand 
and a sceptre in the other. 


Upon the San 
Ssae—S>. 


Said one man to another, “At the high tide of the sea, long ago, with the point of 
my staff I wrote a line upon the sand; and the people still pause to read it, and 
they are careful that naught shall erase it.” 

And the other man said, “And I to wrote a line upon the sand, but it was at low 
tide, and the waves of the vast sea washed it away. But tell me, what did you 
write?” 

And the first man answered and said, “I wrote this: ‘I am he who is.’ But what 
did you write?” 

And the other man said, “This I wrote: ‘I am but a drop of this great ocean.’” 


The Three Gifts 
OO ~ = C) 


Once in the city of Becharre there lived a gracious prince who was loved and 
honoured by all his subjects. 

But there was one exceedingly poor man who was bitter against the prince, 
and who wagged continually a pestilent tongue in his dispraise. 

The prince knew this, yet he was patient. 

But at last he bethought him; and upon a wintry night there came to the door of 
the man a servant of the prince, bearing a sack of flour, a bag of soap and a cone 
of sugar. 

And the servant said, “The prince sends you these gifts in token of 
remembrance.” 

The man was elated, for he thought the gifts were an homage from the prince. 
And in his pride we went to the bishop and told him what the prince had done, 
saying, “Can you not see how the prince desires my goodwill?” 

But the bishop said, “Oh, how wise a prince, and how little you understand. 
He speaks in symbols. The flour is for your empty stomach; the soap is for your 
dirty hide; and the sugar is to sweeten your bitter tongue.” 

From that day forward the man became shy even of himself. His hatred of the 
prince was greater than ever, and even more he hated the bishop who had 
revealed the prince unto him. 

But thereafter he kept silent. 


Peace and War 
O = ~~ C) 


Three dogs were basking in the sun and conversing. The first dog said dreamily, 
“Tt is indeed wondrous to be living in this day of dogdom. Consider the ease with 
which we travel under the sea, upon the earth and even in the sky. And meditate 
for a moment upon the inventions brought forth for the comfort of dogs, even for 
our eyes and ears and noses.” 

And the second dog spoke and he said, “We are more heedful of the arts. We 
bark at the moon more rhythmically than did our forefathers. And when we gaze 
at ourselves in the water we see that our features are clearer than the features of 
yesterday.” 

Then the third dog spoke and said, “But what interests me most and beguiles 
my mind is the tranquil understanding existing between dogdoms.” 

At that very moment they looked, and lo, the dog-catcher was approaching. 

The three dogs sprang up and scampered down the street; and as they ran the 
third dog said, “For God’s sake, run for your lives. Civilization is after us.” 


The Dancer 
'e, — = C) 


Once there came to the court of the Prince of Birkasha a dancer with her 
musicians. And she was admitted to the court, and she danced before the prince 
to the music the lute and the flute and the zither. 

She danced the dance of flames, and the dance of swords and spears; she 
danced the dance of stars and the dance of space. And then she danced the dance 
of flowers in the wind. 

After this she stood before the throne of the prince and bowed her body before 
him. And the prince bade her to come nearer, and he said unto her, “Beautiful 
woman, daughter of grace and delight, whence comes your art? And how is it 
that you command all the elements in your rhythms and your rhymes?” 

And the dancer bowed again before the prince, and she answered, “Mighty and 
gracious Majesty, I know not the answer to your questionings. Only this I know: 
The philosopher’s soul dwells in his head, the poet’s soul is in the heart; the 
singer’s soul lingers about his throat, but the soul of the dancer abides in all her 
body.” 


The Two Guardian Angels 
(2 a = C) 


On an evening two angels met at the city gate, and they greeted one another, and 
they conversed. 

The one angel said, “What are you doing these days, and what work is given 
you?” 

And the other answered, “It was been assigned me to be the guardian of a 
fallen man who lives down in the valley, a great sinner, most degraded. Let me 
assure you it is an important task, and I work hard.” 

The first fallen angel said, “That is an easy commission. I have often known 
sinners, and have been their guardian many a time. But it has now been assigned 
me to be the guardian of the good saint who lives in a bower out yonder. And I 
assure you that is an exceedingly difficult work, and most subtle.” 

Said the first angel, “This is but assumption. How can guarding a saint be 
harder than guarding a sinner?” 

And the other answered, “What impertinence, to call me assumptious! I have 
stated but the truth. Methinks it is you who are assumptious!” 

Then the angels wrangled and fought, first with words and then with fists and 
wings. 

While they were fighting an archangel came by. And he stopped them, and 
said, “Why do you fight? And what is it all about? Know you not that it is most 
unbecoming for guardian angels to fight at the city gate? Tell me, what is your 
disagreement?” 

Then both angels spoke at once, each claiming that the work given him was 
the harder, and that he deserved the greater recognition. 

The archangel shook his head and bethought him. 

Then he said, “My friends, I cannot say now which one of you has the greater 
claim upon honour and reward. But since the power is bestowed in me, therefore 
for peace’ sake and for good guardianship, I give each of you the other’s 


occupation, since each of you insists that the other’s task is the easier one. Now 
go hence and be happy at your work.” 

The angels thus ordered went their ways. But each one looked backward with 
greater anger at the archangel. And in his heart each was saying, “Oh, these 
archangels! Every day they make life harder and still harder for us angels!” 

But the archangel stood there, and once more he bethought him. And he said in 
his heart, “We have indeed, to be watchful and to keep guard over our guardian 
angels.” 


The Statue 
'e, = = C) 


Once there lived a man among the hills who possessed a statue wrought by an 
ancient master. It lay at his door face downward and he was not mindful of it. 

One day there passed by his house a man from the city, a man of knowledge, 
and seeing the statue he inquired of the owner if he would sell it. 

The owner laughed and said, “And pray who would want to buy that dull and 
dirty stone?” 

The man from the city said, “I will give you this piece of silver for it.” 

And the other man was astonished and delighted. 

The statue was removed to the city, upon the back of and elephant. And after 
many moons the man from the hills visited the city, and as he walked the streets 
he saw a crowd before a shop, and a man with a loud voice was crying, “Come 
ye in and behold the most beautiful, the most wonderful statue in all the world. 
Only two silver pieces to look upon this most marvellous work of a master.” 

Thereupon the man from the hills paid two silver pieces and entered the shop 
to see the statue that he himself had sold for one spice of silver. 


The Exchang 


Once upon a crossroad a poor Poet met a rich Stupid, and they conversed. And 
all that they said revealed but their discontent. 

Then the Angel of the Road passed by, and he laid his hand upon the shoulder 
of the two men. 

And behold, a miracle: The two men had now exchanged their possessions. 

And they parted. But strange to relate, the Poet looked and found naught in his 
hand but dry moving sand; and the Stupid closed his eyes and felt naught but 
moving cloud in his heart. 


Love and Hate 
Sesser—ae. 


A woman said unto a man, “I love you.” And the man said, “It is in my heart to 
be worthy of your love.” 

Ant he woman said, “You love me not?” 

And the man only gazed upon her and said nothing. 

Then the woman cried aloud, “I hate you.” 

And the man said, “Then it is also in my heart to be worthy of your hate.” 


Dreams 


A man dreamed a dream, and when he awoke he went to his soothsayer and 
desired that his dream be made plain unto him. 

And the soothsayer said to the man, “Come to me with the dreams that you 
behold in your wakefulness and I will tell you their meaning. But the dreams of 
your sleep belong neither to my wisdom nor to your imagination.” 


The Madman 
2. = a C) 


It was in the garden of a madhouse that I met a youth with a face pale and lovely 
and full of wonder. And I sat beside him upon the bench, and I said, “Why are 
you here?” 

And he looked at me in astonishment, and he said, “It is an unseemly question, 
yet I will answer you. My father would make of me a reproduction of himself; so 
also would my uncle. My mother would have me the image of her seafaring 
husband as the perfect example for me to follow. My brother thinks I should be 
like him, a fine athlete. 

“And my teachers also, the doctor of philosophy, and the music-master, and 
the logician, they too were determined, and each would have me but a reflection 
of his own face in a mirror. 

“Therefore I came to this place. I find it more sane here. At least, I can be 
myself.” 

Then of a sudden he turned to me and he said, “But tell me, were you also 
driven to this place by education and good counsel?” 

And I answered, “No, I am a visitor.” 

And he answered, “Oh, you are one of those who live in the madhouse on the 
other side of the wall.” 


The Frogs 
QO — a C) 


Upon a summer day a frog said to his mate, “I fear those people living in that 
house on the shore are disturbed by our night-songs.” 

And his mate answered and said, “Well, do they not annoy our silence during 
the day with their talking?” 

The frog said, “Let us not forget that we may sing too much in the night.” 

And his mate answered, “Let us not forget that they chatter and shout 
overmuch during the day.” 

Said the frog, “How about the bullfrog who that they clatter and shout 
overmuch during the day.” 

Said the frog, “How about the bullfrog who disturbs the whole neighbourhood 
with his God-forbidden booming?” 

And his mate replied, “Aye, and what say you of the politician and the priest 
and the scientist who come to these shores and fill the air with noisy and 
rhymeless sound?” 

Then the frog said, “Well, let us be better than these human beings. Let us be 
quiet at night, and keep our songs in our hearts, even though the moon calls for 
our rhythm and the stars for our rhyme. At least, let us be silent for a night or 
two, or even for three nights.” 

And his mate said, “Very well, I agree. We shall see what your bountiful heart 
will bring forth.” 

That night the frogs were silent; and they were silent the following night also, 
and again upon the third night. 

And strange to relate, the talkative woman who lived in the house beside the 
lake came down to breakfast on that third day and shouted to her husband, “I 
have not slept these three nights. I was secure with sleep when the noise of the 
frogs was in my ear. But something must have happened. They have not sung 
now for three nights; and I am almost maddened with sleeplessness.” 


The frog heard this and turned to his mate and said, winking his eye, “And we 
were almost maddened with our silence, were we not?” 

And his mate answered, “Yes, the silence of the night was heavy upon us. And 
I can see now that there is no need for us to cease our singing for the comfort of 
those who must needs fill their emptiness with noise.” 

And that night the moon called not in vain for their rhythm nor the stars for 
their rhyme. 


Laws and Law-Giving 
Sesssre—S2. 


Ages ago there was a great king, and he was wise. And he desired to lay laws 
unto his subjects. 

He called upon one thousand wise men of one thousand different tribes to his 
capitol and lay down the laws. 

And all this came to pass. 

But when the thousand laws written upon parchment were put before the king 
and he read them, he wept bitterly in his soul, for he had not known that there 
were one thousand forms of crime in his kingdom. 

Then he called his scribe, and with a smile upon his mouth he himself dictated 
laws. And his laws were but seven. 

And the one thousand wise men left him in anger and returned to their tribes 
with the laws they had laid down. And every tribe followed the laws of its wise 
men. 

Therefore they have a thousand laws even to our own day. 

It is a great country, but it has one thousand prisons, and the prisons are full of 
women and men, breakers of a thousand laws. 

It is indeed a great country, but the people thereof are descendants of one 
thousand law-givers and of only one wise king. 


Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow 


I said to my friend, “You see her leaning upon the arm of that man. It was but 
yesterday that she leaned thus upon my arm.” 


And my friend said, “And tomorrow she will lean upon mine.” 


I said, “Behold her sitting close at his side. It was but yesterday she sat close 
beside me.” 


And he answered, “Tomorrow she will sit beside me.” 


I said, “See, she drinks wine from his cup, and yesterday she drank from 
mine.” 


And he said, “Tomorrow, from my cup.” 

Then I said, “See how she gazes at him with love, and with yielding eyes. 
Yesterday she gazed thus upon me.” 

And my friend said, “It will be upon me she gazes tomorrow.” 

I said, “Do you not hear her now murmuring songs of love into his ears? 
Those very songs of love she murmured but yesterday into my ears.” 

And my friend said, “And tomorrow she will murmur them in mine.” 

I said, “Why see, she is embracing him. It was but yesterday that she embraced 


” 


me. 
And my friend said, “She will embrace me tomorrow.” 
Then I said, “What a strange woman.” 


But he answered, “She is like unto life, possessed by all men; and like death, 
she conquers all men; and like eternity, she enfolds all men.” 


The Philosopher and the Cobbler 
Sesar—S. 


There came to a cobbler’s shop a philosopher with worn shoes. And the 
philosopher said to the cobbler, “Please mend my shoes.” 

And the cobbler said, “I am mending another man’s shoes now, and there are 
still other shoes to patch before I can come to yours. But leave your shoes here, 
and wear this other pair today, and come tomorrow for your own.” 

Then the philosopher was indignant, and he said, “I wear no shoes that are not 
mine own.” 

And the cobbler said, “Well then, are you in truth a philosopher, and cannot 
enfold your feet with the shoes of another man? Upon this very street there is 
another cobbler who understands philosophers better than I do. Go you to him 
for mending.” 


Builders of Bridges 
QO = = C) 


In Antioch where the river Assi goes to meet the sea, a bridge was built to bring 
one half of the city nearer to the other half. It was built of large stones carried 
down from among the hills, on the backs of the mules of Antioch. 

When the bridge was finished, upon a pillar thereof was engraved in Greek 
and in Aramaic, “This bridge was builded by King Antiochus II.” 

And all the people walked across the good bridge over the goodly river Assi. 

And upon an evening, a youth, deemed by some a little mad, descended to the 
pillar where the words were engraven, and he covered over the graving with 
charcoal, and above it wrote, “The stones of this bridge were brought down from 
the hills by the mules. In passing to and fro over it you are riding upon the backs 
of the mules of Antioch, builders of this bridge.” 

And when the people read what the youth had written, some of them laughed 
and some marvelled. And some said, “Ah yes, we know who has done this. Is he 
not a little mad?” 

But one mule said, laughing, to another mule, “Do you not remember that we 
did carry those stones? And yet until now it has been said that the bridge was 
builded by King Antiochus.” 


The Field of Zaad 
2. os = C) 


Upon the road of Zaad a traveller met a man who lived in a nearby village, and 
the traveller, pointing with his hand to a vast field, asked the man saying, “Was 
not this the battle-ground where King Ahlam overcame his enemies?” 

And the man answered and said, “This has never been a battle-ground. There 
once stood on this field the great city of Zaad, and it was burnt down to ashes. 
But now it is a good field, is it not?” 

And the traveller and the man parted. 

Not a half mile farther the traveller met another man, and pointing to the field 
again, he said, “So that is where the great city of Zaad once stood?’ 

And the man said, “There has never been a city in this place. But once there 
was a monastery here, and it was destroyed by the people of the South Country.” 

Shortly after, on that very road of Zaad, the traveller met a third man, and 
pointing once more to the vast field he said, “Is it not true that this is the place 
where once there stood a great monastery?” 

But the man answered, “There has never been a monastery in this 
neighbourhood, but our fathers and our forefathers have told us that once there 
fell a great meteor on this field.” 

Then the traveller walked on, wondering in his heart. And he met a very old 
man, and saluting his he said, “Sir, upon this road I have met three men who live 
in the neighbourhood and I have asked each of them about this field, and each 
one denied what the other had said, and each one told me a new tale that the 
other had not told.” 

Then the old man raised his head, and answered, “My friend, each and every 
one of these men told you what was indeed so; but few of us are able to add fact 
to different fact and make a truth thereof.” 


The Golden Belt 
( a = C) 


Once upon a day two men who met on the road were walking together toward 
Salamis, the City of Columns. In the mid-afternoon they came to a wide river 
and there was no bridge to cross it. They must needs swim, or seek another road 
unknown to them. 

And they said to one another, “Let us swim. After all, the river is not so wide.” 
And they threw themselves into the water and swam. 

And one of the men who had always known rivers and the ways of rivers, in 
mid-stream suddenly began to lose himself; and to be carried away by the 
rushing waters; while the other who had never swum before crossed the river 
straight-way and stood upon the farther bank. Then seeing his companion still 
wrestling with the stream, he threw himself again into the waters and brought 
him also safely to the shore. 

And the man who had been swept away by the current said, “But you told me 
you could not swim. How then did you cross that river with such assurance?” 

And the second man answered, “My friend, do you see this belt which girdles 
me? It is full of golden coins that I have earned for my wife and my children, a 
full year’s work. It is the weight of this belt of gold that carried me across the 
river, to my wife and my children. And my wife and my children were upon my 
shoulders as I swam.” 

And the two men walked on together toward Salamis. 


The Red Earth 
aaa, 


Said a tree to a man, “My roots are in the deep red earth, and I shall give you of 
my fruit.” 

And the man said to the tree, “How alike we are. My roots are also deep in the 
red earth. And the red earth gives you power to bestow upon me of your fruit, 
and the red earth teaches me to receive from you with thanksgiving.” 


The Full Moon 
SesSsar—ase. 


The full moon rose in glory upon the town, and all the dogs of that town began 
to bark at the moon. 
Only one dog did not bark, and he said to them in a grave voice, “Awake not 
stillness from her sleep, nor bring you the moon to the earth with your barking.” 
Then all the dogs ceased barking, in awful silence. But the dog who had 
spoken to them continued barking for silence, the rest of the night. 


The Hermit Prophet 


2 


_ —9 


Once there lived a hermit prophet, and thrice a moon he would go down to the 
great city and in the market places he would preach giving and sharing to the 
people. And he was eloquent, and his fame was upon the land. 

Upon an evening three men came to his hermitage and he greeted them. And 
they said, “You have been preaching giving and sharing, and you have sought to 
teach those who have much to give unto those who have little; and we doubt not 
that your fame has brought you riches. Now come and give us of your riches, for 
we are in need.” 

And the hermit answered and said, “My friends, I have naught but this bed and 
this mat and this jug of water. Take them if it is in your desire. I have neither 
gold nor silver.” 

Then they looked down with distain upon him, and turned their faces from 
him, and the last man stood at the door for a moment, and said, “Oh, you cheat! 
You fraud! You teach and preach that which you yourself do not perform.” 


The Old, Old Wine 


2 C 


Seasrr—S2. 


Once there lived a rich man who was justly proud of his cellar and the wine 
therein. And there was one jug of ancient vintage kept for some occasion known 
only to himself. 

The governor of the state visited him, and he bethought him and said, “That 
jug shall not be opened for a mere governor.” 

And a bishop of the diocese visited him, but he said to himself, “Nay, I will 
not open that jug. He would not know its value, nor would its aroma reach his 
nostrils.” 

The prince of the realm came and supped with him. But he thought, “It is too 
royal a wine for a mere princeling.” 

And even on the day when his own nephew was married, he said to himself, 
“No, not to these guests shall that jug be brought forth.” 

And the years passed by, and he died, an old man, and he was buried like unto 
every seed and acorn. 

And upon the day that he was buried the ancient jug was brought out together 
with other jugs of wine, and it was shared by the peasants of the neighbourhood. 
And none knew its great age. 

To them, all that is poured into a cup is only wine. 


The Two Poems 
2, a = C) 


Many centuries ago, on a road to Athens, two poets met, and they were glad to 
see one another. 

And one poet asked the other saying, “What have you composed of late, and 
how goes it with your lyre?” 

And the other poet answered and said with pride, “I have but now finished the 
greatest of my poems, perchance the greatest poem yet written in Greek. It is an 
invocation to Zeus the Supreme.” 

Then he took from beneath his cloak a parchment, saying, “Here, behold, I 
have it with me, and I would fain read it to you. Come, let us sit in the shade of 
that white cypress.” 

And the poet read his poem. And it was a long poem. 

And the other poet said in kindliness, “This is a great poem. It will live 
through the ages, and in it you shall be glorified.” 

And the first poet said calmly, “And what have you been writing these late 
days?” 

And the other another, “I have written but little. Only eight lines in 
remembrance of a child playing in a garden.” And he recited the lines. 

The first poet said, “Not so bad; not so bad.” 

And they parted. 

And now after two thousand years the eight lines of the one poet are read in 
every tongue, and are loved and cherished. 

And though the other poem has indeed come down through the ages in 
libraries and in the cells of scholars, and though it is remembered, it is neither 
loved nor read. 


Lady Ruth 
(2 = a C) 


Three men once looked from afar upon a white house that stood alone on a green 
hill. One of them said, “That is the house of Lady Ruth. She is an old witch.” 

The second man said, “You are wrong. Lady Ruth is a beautiful woman who 
lives there consecrated unto her dreams.” 

The third man said, “You are both wrong. Lady Ruth is the holder of this vast 
land, and she draws blood from her serfs.” 

And they walked on discussing Lady Ruth. Then when they came to a 
crossroad they met an old man, and one of them asked him, saying, “Would you 
please tell us about the Lady Ruth who lives in that white house upon the hill?” 

And the old man raised his head and smiled upon them, and said, “I am ninety 
of years, and I remember Lady Ruth when I was but a boy. But Lady Ruth died 
eighty years ago, and now the house is empty. The owls hoot therein, sometimes, 
and people say the place is haunted.” 


The Mouse and the Cat 


Once on an evening a poet met a peasant. The poet was distant and the peasant 
was shy, yet they conversed. 

And the peasant said, “Let me tell you a little story which I heard of late. A 
mouse was caught in a trap, and while he was happily eating the cheese that lay 
therein, a cat stood by. The mouse trembled awhile, but he knew he was safe 
within the trap. 

“Then the cat said, “You are eating your last meal, my friend.’ 

“Ves,” answered the mouse, ‘one life have I, therefore one death. But what of 
you? They tell me you have nine lives. Doesn’t that mean that you will have to 
die nine times?’” 

And the peasant looked at the poet and he said, “Is not this a strange story?” 

And the poet answered him not, but he walked away saying in his soul, “To be 
sure, nine lives have we, nine lives to be sure. And we shall die nine times, nine 
times shall we die. Perhaps it were better to have but one life, caught in a trap— 
the life of a peasant with a bit of cheese for the last meal. And yet, are we not kin 
unto the lions of the desert and the jungle?” 


The Curse 


And old man of the sea once said to me, “It was thirty years ago that a sailor ran 
away with my daughter. And I cursed them both in my heart, for of all the world 
I loved but my daughter. 

“Not long after that, the sailor youth went down with his ship to the bottom of 
the sea, and with him my lovely daughter was lost unto me. 

“Now therefore behold in me the murderer of a youth and a maid. It was my 
curse that destroyed them. And now on my way to the grave I seek God’s 
forgiveness.” 

This the old man said. But there was a tone of bragging in his words, and it 
seems that he is still proud of the power of his curse. 


The Pomegranates 
Saree. 


There was once a man who had many pomegranate trees in his orchard. And for 
many an autumn he would put his pomegranates on silvery trays outside of his 
dwelling, and upon the trays he would place signs upon which he himself had 
written, “Take one for aught. You are welcome.” 

But people passed by and no one took of the fruit. 

Then the man bethought him, and one autumn he placed no pomegranates on 
silvery trays outside of his dwelling, but he raised this sign in large lettering: 
“Here we have the best pomegranates in the land, but we sell them for more 
silver than any other pomegranates.” 

And now behold, all the men and women of the neighbourhood came rushing 
to buy. 


God and Many Gods 


2 


| — 


In the city of Kilafis a sophist stood on the steps of the Temple and preached 
many gods. And the people said in their hearts, “We know all this. Do they not 
live with us and follow us wherever we go?” 

Not long after, another man stood in the market place and spoke unto the 
people and said, “There is no god.” And many who heard him were glad of his 
tidings, for they were afraid of gods. 

And upon another day there came a man of great eloquence, an he said, “There 
is but one God.” And now the people were dismayed for in their hearts they 
feared the judgment of one God more than that of many gods. 

That same season there came yet another man, and he said to the people, 
“There are three gods, and they dwell upon the wind as one, and they have a vast 
and gracious mother who is also their mate and their sister.” 

Then everyone was comforted, for they said in their secret, “three gods in one 
must needs disagree over our failings, and besides, their gracious mother will 
surely be an advocate for us poor weaklings.” 

Yet even to this day there are those in the city of Kilafis who wrangle and 
argue with each other about many gods and no god, and one god and three gods 
in one, and a gracious mother of gods. 


She Who was Deaf 
OO a = C) 


Once there lived a rich man who had a young wife, and she was stone deaf. 

And upon a morning when they were breaking their feast, she spoke to him 
and she said, “Yesterday I visited the market place, and there were exhibited 
silken raiment from Damascus, and coverchiefs from India, necklaces from 
Persia, and bracelets from Yamman. It seems that the caravans had but just 
brought these things to our city. And now behold me, in rags, yet the wife of a 
rich man. I would have some of those beautiful things.” 

The husband, still busy with his morning coffee said, “My dear, there is no 
reason why you should not go down to the Street and buy all that your heart may 
desire.” 

And the deaf wife said, “‘No!’ You always say, ‘No, no.’ Must I needs appear 
in tatters among our friends to shame your wealth and my people?” 

And the husband said, “I did not say, ‘No.’ You may go forth freely to the 
market place and purchase the most beautiful apparel and jewels that have come 
to our city.” 

But again the wife mis-read his words, and she replied, “Of all rich men you 
are the most miserly. You would deny me everything of beauty and loveliness, 
while other women of my age walk the gardens of the city clothed in rich 
raiment.” 

And she began to weep. And as her tears fell upon her breast she cried out 
again, “You always say, ‘Nay, nay’ to me when I desire a garment or a jewel.” 

Then the husband was moved, and he stood up and took out of his purse a 
handful of gold and placed it before her, saying in a kindly voice, “Go down to 
the market place, my dear, and buy all that you will.” 

From that day onward the deaf young wife, whenever she desired anything, 
would appear before her husband with a pearly tear in her eye, and he in silence 
would take out a handful of gold and place it in her lap. 


Now, it changed that the young woman fell in love with a youth whose habit it 
was to make long journeys. And whenever he was away she would sit in her 
casement and weep. 

When her husband found her thus weeping, he would say in his heart, “There 
must be some new caravan, and some silken garments and rare jewels in the 
Street.” 


And he would take a handful of gold and place it before her. 


The Quest 
QO mn = C) 


A thousand years ago two philosophers met on a slope of Lebanon, and one said 
to the other, “Where goest thou?” 

And the other answered, “I am seeking after the fountain of youth which I 
know wells out among these hills. I have found writings which tell of that 
fountain flowering toward the sun. And you, what are you seeking?” 

The first man answered, “I am seeking after the mystery of death.” 

Then each of the two philosophers conceived that the other was lacking in his 
great science, and they began to wrangle, and to accuse each other of spiritual 
blindness. 

Now while the two philosophers were loud upon the wind, a stranger, a man 
who was deemed a simpleton in his own village, passed by, and when he heard 
the two in hot dispute, he stood awhile and listened to their argument. 

Then he came near to them and said, “My good men, it seems that you both 
really belong to the same school of philosophy, and that you are speaking of the 
same thing, only you speak in different words. One of you is seeks the fountain 
of youth, and the other seeks the mystery of death. Yet indeed they are but one, 
and as they dwell in you both.” 

Then the stranger turned away saying, “Farewell sages.” And as he departed 
he laughed a patient laughter. 

The two philosophers looked at each other in silence for a moment, and then 
they laughed also. And one of them said, “Well now, shall we not walk and seek 
together.” 


The Sceptre 


Said a king to his wife, “Madame, you are not truly a queen. You are too vulgar 
and ungracious to be my mate.” 

Said his wife, “Sir, you deem yourself king, but indeed you are only a poor 
soundling.” 

Now these words angered the king, and he took his sceptre with his hand, and 
struck the queen upon her forehead with his golden sceptre. 

At that moment the lord chamberlain entered, and he said, “Well, well, 
Majesty! That sceptre was fashioned by the greatest artist of the land. Alas! 
Some day you and the queen shall be forgotten, but this sceptre shall be kept, a 
thing of beauty from generation to generation. And now that you have drawn 
blood from her Majesty’s head, Sire, the sceptre shall be the more considered 
and remembered.” 


The Path 
OO — = C) 


There lived among the hills a woman and her son, and he was her first-born and 
her only child. 

And the boy died of a fever whilst the physician stood by. 

The mother was distraught with sorrow, and she cried to the physician and 
besought him saying, “Tell me, tell me, what was it that made quiet his striving 
and silent his song?” 

And the physician said, “It was the fever.” 

And the mother said, “What is the fever?” 

And the physician answered, “I cannot explain it. It is a thing infinitely small 
that visits the body, and we cannot see it with the human eye.” 

The physician left her. And she kept repeating to herself, “Something infinitely 
small. We cannot see it with our human eye.” 

And at evening the priest came to console her. And she wept and she cried out 
saying, “Oh, why have I lost my son, my only son, my first-born?” 

And the priest answered, “My child, it is the will of God.” 

And the woman said, “What is God and where is God? I would see God that I 
may tear my bosom before Him, and pour the blood of my heart at His feet. Tell 
me where I shall find Him.” 

And the priest said, “God is infinitely vast. He is not to be seen with our 
human eye.” 

Then the woman cried out, “The infinitely small has slain my son through the 
will of the infinitely great! Then what are we? What are we?” 

At that moment the woman’s mother came into the room with the shroud for 
the dead boy, and she heard the words of the priest and also her daughter’s cry. 
And she laid down the shroud, and took her daughter’s hand in her own hand, 
and she said, “My daughter, we ourselves are the infinitely small and the 
infinitely great; and we are the path between the two.” 


The Whale and the Butterfly 
Sesare—S. 


Once on an evening a man and a woman found themselves together in a 
stagecoach. They had met before. 

The man was a poet, and as he sat beside the woman he sought to amuse her 
with stories, some that were of his own weaving, and some that were not his 
own. 

But even while he was speaking the lady went to sleep. Then suddenly the 
coach lurched, and she awoke, and she said, “I admire your interpretation of the 
story of Jonah and the whale.” 

And the poet said, “But Madame, I have been telling you a story of mine own 
about a butterfly and a white rose, and how they behaved the one to the other!” 


The Shadow 


Upon a June day the grass said to the shadow of an elm tree, “You move to right 
and left over-often, and you disturb my peace.” 

And the shadow answered and said, “Not I, not I. Look skyward. There is a 
tree that moves in the wind to the east and to the west, between the sun and the 
earth.” 

And the grass looked up, and for the first time beheld the tree. And it said in 
its heart, “Why, behold, there is a larger grass than myself.” 

And the grass was silent. 


Peace Contagious 


> 


One branch in bloom said to his neighbouring branch, “This is a dull and empty 
day.” And the other branch answered, “It is indeed empty and dull.” 

At that moment a sparrow alighted on one of the branches, and the another 
Sparrow, nearby. 

And one of the sparrows chirped and said, “My mate has left me.” 

And the other sparrow cried, “My mate has also gone, and she will not return. 
And what care I?” 

Then the two birds began to twitter and scold, and soon they were fighting and 
making harsh noise upon the air. 

All of a sudden two other sparrows came sailing from the sky, and they sat 
quietly beside the restless two. And there was calm, and there was peace. 

Then the four flew away together in pairs. 

And the first branch said to his neighbouring branch, “That was a mighty zig- 
zag of sound.” 

And the other branch answered, “Call it what you will, it is now both peaceful 
and spacious. And if the upper air makes peace it seems to me that those who 
dwell in the lower might make peace also. Will you not wave in the wind a little 
nearer to me?” 

And the first branch said, “Oh, perchance, for peace’ sake, ere the Spring is 
over.” 

And then he waved himself with the strong wind to embrace her. 


Seventy 


? C 


Seasrr—S 2. 


The poet youth said to the princess, “I love you.” And the princess answered, 
“And I love you too, my child.” 

“But I am not your child. Iam a man and I love you.” 

And she said, “I am the mother of sons and daughters, and they are fathers and 
mothers of sons and daughters; and one of the sons of my sons is older than 
you.” 

And the poet youth said, “But I love you.” 

It was not long after that the princess died. But ere her last breath was received 
again by the greater breath of earth, she said within her soul, “My beloved, mine 
only son, my youth-poet, it may yet be that some day we shall meet again, and I 
shall not be seventy.” 


Finding God 


Sara, 


Two men were walking in the valley, and one man pointed with his finger toward 
the mountain side, and said, “See you that hermitage? There lives a man who has 
long divorced the world. He seeks but after God, and naught else upon this 
earth.” 

And the other man said, “He shall not find God until he leaves his hermitage, 
and the aloneness of his hermitage, and returns to our world, to share our joy and 
pain, to dance with our dancers at the wedding feast, and to weep with those who 
weep around the coffins of our dead.” 

And the other man was convinced in his heart, though in spite of his 
conviction he answered, “I agree with all that you say, yet I believe the hermit is 
a good man. And it may it not well be that one good man by his absence does 
better than the seeming goodness of these many men?” 


The River 
2, os = C) 


In the valley of Kadisha where the mighty river flows, two little streams met and 
spoke to one another. 

One stream said, “How came you, my friend, and how was your path?” 

And the other answered, “My path was most encumbered. The wheel of the 
mill was broken, and the master farmer who used to conduct me from my 
channel to his plants, is dead. I struggled down oozing with the filth of laziness 
in the sun. But how was your path, my brother?” 

And the other stream answered and said, “Mine was a different path. I came 
down the hills among fragrant flowers and shy willows; men and women drank 
of me with silvery cups, and little children paddled their rosy feet at my edges, 
and there was laughter all about me, and there were sweet songs. What a pity 
that your path was not so happy.” 

At that moment the river spoke with a loud voice and said, “Come in, come in, 
we are going to the sea. Come in, come in, speak no more. Be with me now. We 
are going to the sea. Come in, come in, for in me you shall forget you 
wanderings, sad or gay. Come in, come in. And you and I will forget all our 
ways when we reach the heart of our mother the sea.” 


The Two Hunters 
'e, = = C) 


Upon a day in May, Joy and Sorrow met beside a lake. They greeted one another, 
and they sat down near the quiet waters and conversed. 

Joy spoke of the beauty which is upon the earth, and the daily wonder of life in 
the forest and among the hills, and of the songs heard at dawn and eventide. 

And sorrow spoke, and agreed with all that Joy had said; for Sorrow knew the 
magic of the hour and the beauty thereof. And Sorrow was eloquent when he 
spoke of May in the fields and among the hills. 

And Joy and Sorrow talked long together, and they agreed upon all things of 
which they knew. 

Now there passed by on the other side of the lake two hunters. And as they 
looked across the water one of them said, “I wonder who are those two 
persons?” And the other said, “Did you say two? I see only one.” 

The first hunter said, “But there are two.” And the second said, “There is only 
one that I can see, and the reflection in the lake is only one.” 

“Nay, there are two,” said the first hunter, “and the reflection in the still water 
is of two persons.” 

But the second man said again, “Only one do I see.” And again the other said, 
“But I see two so plainly.” 

And even unto this day one hunter says that the other sees double; while the 
other says, “My friend is somewhat blind.” 


The Other Wanderer 
Sesser—ae. 


Once on a time I met another man of the roads. He too was a little mad, and thus 
spoke to me: 

“T am a wanderer. Oftentimes it seems that I walk the earth among pygmies. 
And because my head is seventy cubits farther from the earth than theirs, it 
creates higher and freer thoughts. 

“But in truth I walk not among men but above them, and all they can see of me 
is my footprints in their open fields. 

“And often have I heard them discuss and disagree over the shape and size of 
my footprints. For there are some who say, “These are the tracks of a mammoth 
that roamed the earth in the far past.’ And others say, ‘Nay, these are places 
where meteors have fallen from the distant stars.’ 

“But you, my friend, you know full well that they are naught save the 
footprints of a wanderer.” 


YOU HAVE YOUR LEBANON AND I HAVE MY 
LEBANON 


You have your Lebanon and its dilemma. I have my Lebanon and its beauty. 
Your Lebanon is an arena for men from the West and men from the East. 

My Lebanon is a flock of birds fluttering in the early morning as shepherds 
lead their sheep into the meadow and rising in the evening as farmers return 
from their fields and vineyards. 

You have your Lebanon and its people. I have my Lebanon and its people. 

Yours are those whose souls were born in the hospitals of the West; they are as 
ship without rudder or sail upon a raging sea... They are strong and eloquent 
among themselves but weak and dumb among Europeans. 

They are brave, the liberators and the reformers, but only in their own area. 
But they are cowards, always led backwards by the Europeans. They are those 
who croak like frogs boasting that they have rid themselves of their ancient, 
tyrannical enemy, but the truth of the matter is that this tyrannical enemy still 
hides within their own souls. They are the slaves for whom time had exchanged 
rusty chains for shiny ones so that they thought themselves free. These are the 
children of your Lebanon. Is there anyone among them who represents the 
strength of the towering rocks of Lebanon, the purity of its water or the 
fragrance of its air? Who among them vouchsafes to say, “When I die I leave my 
country little better than when I was born”? 

Who among them dare to say, “My life was a drop of blood in the veins of 
Lebanon, a tear in her eyes or a smile upon her lips”? 

Those are the children of your Lebanon. They are, in your estimation, great; 
but insignificant in my estimation. 

Let me tell you who are the children of my Lebanon. 

They are farmers who would turn the fallow field into garden and grove. 

They are the shepherds who lead their flocks through the valleys to be fattened 


for your table meat and your woolens. 

They are the vine-pressers who press the grape to wine and boil it to syrup. 

They are the parents who tend the nurseries, the mothers who spin the silken 
yarn. 

They are the husbands who harvest the wheat and the wives who gather the 
sheaves. 

They are the builders, the potters, the weavers and the bell-casters. 

They are the poets who pour their souls in new cups. 

They are those who migrate with nothing but courage in their hearts and 
strength in their arms but who return with wealth in their hands and a wreath of 
glory upon their heads. 

They are the victorious wherever they go and loved and respected wherever 
they settle. 

They are the ones born in huts but who died in palaces of learning. 

These are the children of Lebanon; they are the lamps that cannot be snuffed 
by the wind and the salt which remains unspoiled through the ages. 

They are the ones who are steadily moving toward perfection, beauty, and 
truth. 

What will remain of your Lebanon after a century? Tell me! Except bragging, 
lying and stupidity? Do you expect the ages to keep in its memory the traces of 
deceit and cheating and hypocrisy? Do you think the atmosphere will preserve in 
its pockets the shadows of death and the stench of graves? 

Do you believe life will accept a patched garment for a dress? Verily, I say to 
you that an olive plant in the hills of Lebanon will outlast all of your deeds and 
your works; that the wooden plow pulled by the oxen in the crannies of Lebanon 
is nobler than your dreams and aspirations. 

I say to you, while the conscience of time listened to me, that the songs of a 
maiden collecting herbs in the valleys of Lebanon will outlast all the uttering of 
the most exalted prattler among you. I say to you that you are achieving nothing. 
If you knew that you are accomplishing nothing, I would feel sorry for you, but 
you know it not. 

You have your Lebanon and I have my Lebanon. 


YOUR THOUGHT AND MINE 


Your thought is a tree rooted deep in the soil of tradition and whose branches 
grow in the power of continuity. 

My thought is a cloud moving in the space. It turns into drops which, as they 
fall, form a brook that sings its way into the sea. Then it rises as vapour into the 
sky. Your thought is a fortress that neither gale nor the lightning can shake. My 
thought is a tender leaf that sways in every direction and finds pleasure in its 
swaying. Your thought is an ancient dogma that cannot change you nor can you 
change it. My thought is new, and it tests me and I test it morn and eve. 


You have your thought and I have mine. 
oK OK OK 


Your thought allows you to believe in the unequal contest of the strong against 
the weak, and in the tricking of the simple by the subtle ones. My thought 
creates in me the desire to till the earth with my hoe, and harvest the crops with 
my sickle, and build my home with stones and mortar, and weave my raiment 
with woollen and linen threads. Your thought urges you to marry wealth and 
notability. Mine commends self-reliance. Your thought advocates fame and 
show. Mine counsels me and implores me to cast aside notoriety and treat it like 
a grain of sand cast upon the shore of eternity. Your thought instils in your heart 
arrogance and superiority. Mine plants within me love for peace and the desire 
for independence. Your thought begets dreams of palaces with furniture of 
sandalwood studded with jewels, and beds made of twisted silk threads. My 
thought speaks softly in my ears, “Be clean in body and spirit even if you have 
nowhere to lay your head.” Your thought makes you aspire to titles and 
offices. Mine exhorts me to humble service. 


You have your thought and I have mine. 
mK OK OK 


Your thought is social science, a religious and political dictionary. Mine is 


simple axiom. Your thought speaks of the beautiful woman, the ugly, the 
virtuous, the prostitute, the intelligent, and the stupid. Mine sees in every woman 
a mother, a sister, or a daughter of every man. The subjects of your thought are 
thieves, criminals, and assassins. Mine declares that thieves are the creatures of 
monopoly, criminals are the offspring of tyrants, and assassins are akin to the 
slain. Your thought describes laws, courts, judges, punishments. Mine explains 
that when man makes a law, he either violates it or obeys it. If there is a basic 
law, we are all one before it. He who disdains the mean is himself mean. He who 
vaunts his scorn of the sinful vaunts his disdain of all humanity. Your thought 
concerns the skilled, the artist, the intellectual, the philosopher, the priest. Mine 
speaks of the loving and the affectionate, the sincere, the honest, the forthright, 
the kindly, and the martyr. Your thought advocates Judaism, Brahmanism, 
Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam. In my thought there is only one universal 
religion, whose varied paths are but the fingers of the loving hand of the 
Supreme Being. In your thought there are the rich, the poor, and the beggared. 
My thought holds that there are no riches but life; that we are all beggars, and no 
benefactor exists save life herself. 


You have your thought and I have mine. 
mK OK OK 


According to your thought, the greatness of nations lies in their politics, their 
parties, their conferences, their alliances and treaties. But mine proclaims that 
the importance of nations lies in work—work in the field, work in the vineyards, 
work with the loom, work in the tannery, work in the quarry, work in the 
timberyard, work in the office and in the press. Your thought holds that the glory 
of the nations is in their heroes. It sings the praises of Rameses, Alexander, 
Caesar, Hannibal, and Napoleon. But mine claims that the real heroes are 
Confucius, Lao-Tse, Socrates, Plato, Abi Taleb, El Gazali, Jalal Ed-din-el 
Roumy, Copernicus, and Pasteur. Your thought sees power in armies, cannons, 
battleships, submarines, aeroplanes, and poison gas. But mine asserts that power 
lies in reason, resolution, and truth. No matter how long the tyrant endures, he 
will be the loser at the end. Your thought differentiates between pragmatist and 
idealist, between the part and the whole, between the mystic and materialist. 
Mine realizes that life is one and its weights, measures and tables do not 
coincide with your weights, measures and tables. He whom you suppose an 
idealist may be a practical man. 


You have your thought and I have mine. 


OK OOK OK 


Your thought is interested in ruins and museums, mummies and petrified 
objects. But mine hovers in the ever-renewed haze and clouds. Your thought is 
enthroned on skulls. Since you take pride in it, you glorify it too. My thought 
wanders in the obscure and distant valleys. Your thought trumpets while you 
dance. Mine prefers the anguish of death to your music and dancing. Your 
thought is the thought of gossip and false pleasure. Mine is the thought of him 
who is lost in his own country, of the alien in his own nation, of the solitary 
among his kinfolk and friends. 


You have your thought and I have mine. 


